
The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode 
of production prevails, presents itself as "an immense accumula- 
tion of commodities," 1 its unit being a single commodity. Our 
investigation must therefore begin with the analysis of a com- 
modity. ||A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a 
thing that by its properties satisfies human wants of some sort 
or another. The nature of such wants, whether, for instance, 
they spring from the stomach or from fancy, makes no differ- 
ence. 2 Neither are we here concerned to know how the object 
satisfies these wants, whether directly as means of subsistence, 
or indirectly as means of production. ||The utility of a thing makes it a use-value. x But this utility 
is not a thing of air. Being limited by the physical properties of 
the commodity, it has no existence apart from that commodity. 
A commodity, such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so 
far as it is a material thing, a use-value, something useful. This 
property of a commodity is independent of the amount of labour 
required to appropriate its useful qualities. When treating of 
use-value, we always assume to be dealing with definite quantities, 
such as dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The 
use-values of commodities furnish the material for a special 
study, that of the commercial knowledge of commodities. 2 
Use-values become a reality only by use or consumption: they 
also constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the 
social form of that wealth. In the form of society we are about to 
consider, they are, in addition, the material depositories of ex- 
change-value. ||Exchange-value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantita- 
tive relation, as the proportion in which values in use of one sort 
are exchanged for those of another sort, 3 a relation constantly 
changing with time and place. Hence exchange-value appears 
to be something accidental and purely relative, and consequently 
an intrinsic value, i.e., an exchange-value that is inseparably 
connected with, inherent in commodities, seems a contradiction 
in terms. 4 Let us consider the matter a little more closely. ||1 "The natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to supply the 
necessities, or serve the conveniencies of human life." (John Locke, "Some Con- 
siderations on the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest, 1691," in Works 
Edit. Lond., 1777, Vol. II., p. 28.) In English writers of the 17th century we 
frequently find "worth" in the sense of value in use, and "value" in the sense 
of exchange-value. This is quite in accordance with the spirit of a language 
that likes to use a Teutonic word for the actual thing, and a Romance word 
for its reflexion. ||A given commodity, e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged 
for x blacking, y silk, or z gold, &c— in short, for other commodi- 
ties in the most different proportions. Instead of one exchange- 
value, the wheat has, therefore, a great many. But since x black- 
ing, y silk, or z gold, &c, each represent the exchange-value 
of one quarter of wheat, x blacking, y silk, z gold, &c, must, 
as exchange-values, be replaceable by each other, or equal to 
each other. Therefore, first: the valid exchange-values of a given 
commodity express something equal; secondly, exchange-value, 
generally, is only the mode of expression, the phenomenal form, 
of something contained in it, yet distinguishable from it. ||Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The pro- 
portions in which they are exchangeable, whatever those propor- 
tions may be, can always be represented by an equation in which 
a given quantity of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: 
e.g., 1 quarter corn=xcwt. iron. What does this equation tell us? 
It tells us that in two different things — in 1 quarter of corn and 
x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal quantities something common 
to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a third, which 
in itself is neither the one nor the other. Each of them, so far 
as it is exchange-value, must therefore be reducible to this third. ||A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear. In 
order to calculate and compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we 
decompose them into triangles. But the area of the triangle itself 
is expressed by something totally different from its visible figure, 
namely, by half the product of the base into the altitude. In the 
same way the exchange-values of commodities must be capable 
of being expressed in terms of something common to them all, 
of which thing they represent a greater or less quantity. ||This common "something" cannot be either a geometrical, 
a chemical, or any other natural property of commodities. Such 
properties claim our attention only in so far as they affect the 
utility of those commodities, make them use-values. But the 
exchange of commodities is evidently an act characterised by a 
total abstraction from use-value. Then one use-value is just as 
good as another, provided only it be present in sufficient quantity. 
Or, as old Barbon says, "one sort of wares are as good as another, if 
the values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in things of 
equal value.... An hundred pounds' worth of lead or iron, is 
of as great value as one hundred pounds' worth of silver or gold." 1 
As use-values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, ||If then we leave out of consideration the use-value of com- 
modities, they have only one common property left, that of being 
products of labour. But even the product of labour itself has un- 
dergone a change in our hands. If we make abstraction from its 
use-value, we make abstraction at the same time from the material 
elements and shapes that make the product a use-value; we see 
in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or any other useful thing. 
Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight. Neither can 
it any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the joiner, 
the mason, the spinner, or of any other definite kind of productive 
labour. Along with the useful qualities of the products them- 
selves, we put out of sight both the useful character of the various 
kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that 
labour; there is nothing left but what is common to them all; 
all are reduced to one and the same sort of labour, human labour 
in the abstract. ' ||Let us now consider the residue of each of these products; 
it consists of the same unsubstantial reality in each, a mere con- 
gelation of homogeneous human labour, of labour-power expend- 
ed without regard to the mode of its expenditure. All that these 
things now tell us is, that human labour-power has been expended 
in their production, that human labour is embodied in them. When 
looked at as crystals of this social substance, common to them 
all, they are — Values. ||We have seen that when commodities are exchanged, their 
exchange-value manifests itself as something totally independent 
of their use-value. But if we abstract from their use-value, there 
remains their Value as defined above. Therefore, the common 
substance that manifests itself in the exchange-value of commod- 
ities, whenever they are exchanged, is their value. The progress 
of our investigation will show that exchange-value is the only 
form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself or 
be expressed. For the present, however, we have to consider the 
nature of value independently of this, its form. ||A use-value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because 
human labour in the abstract has been embodied or materialised 
in it. How, then, is the magnitude of this value to be measured? 
Plainly, by the quantity of the value-creating substance, the 
labour, contained in the article. The quantity of labour, however, 
is measured by its duration, and labour-time in its turn finds its 
standard in weeks, days, and hours. ||Some people might think that if the value of a commodity 
is determined by the quantity of labour spent on it, the more 
idle and unskilful the labourer, the more valuable would his 
commodity be, because more time would be required in its pro- 
duction. The labour, however, that forms the substance of value, 
is homogeneous human labour, expenditure of one uniform la- 
bour-power. The total labour-power of society, which is embodied 
in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced by that 
society, counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labour- 
power, composed though it be of innumerable individual units. 
Each of these units is the same as any other, so far as it has the 
character of the average labour-power of society, and takes effect as 
such; that is, so far as it requires for producing a commodity, no 
more time than is needed on an average, no more than is socially 
necessary. The labour-time socially necessary is that required to 
produce an article under the normal conditions of production, and 
with the average degree of skill and intensity prevalent at the time. 
The introduction of power-looms into England probably reduced 
by one-half the labour required to weave a given quantity of 
yarn into cloth. The hand-loom weavers, as a matter of fact, 
continued to require the same time as before; but for all that, the 
product of one hour of their labour represented after the change 
only half an hour's social labour, and consequently fell to one-half 
its former value. ||We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the 
value of any article is the amount of labour socially necessary, 
or the labour-time socially necessary for its production. 1 Each 
individual commodity, in this connexion, is to be considered as 
an average sample of its class. 2 Commodities, therefore, in which 
equal quantities of labour are embodied, or which can be produced 
in the same time, have the same value. The value of one commodity 
is to the value of any other, as the labour-time necessary for the 
production of the one is to that necessary for the production of the ||1 "The value of them (the necessaries of life), when they are exchanged 
the one for another, is regulated by the quantity of labour necessarily re- 
quired, and commonly taken in producing them." ("Some Thoughts on the 
Interest of Money in General, and Particularly in the Publick Funds, &c." 
Lond., p. 36.) This remarkable anonymous work, written in the last cen- 
tury, bears no date. It is clear, however, from internal evidence, that it ap- 
peared in the reign of George II. about 1739 or 1740. ||The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, 
if the labour-time required for its production also remained 
constant. But the latter changes with every variation in the 
productiveness of labour. This productiveness is determined by 
various circumstances, amongst others, by the average amount 
of skill of the workmen, the state of science, and the degree of 
its practical application, the social organisation of production, 
the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and by 
physical conditions. For example, the same amount of labour in 
favourable seasons is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfa- 
vourable, only in four. The same labour extracts from rich mines 
more metal than from poor mines. Diamonds are of very rare 
occurrence on the earth's surface, and hence their discovery costs, 
on an average, a great deal of labour-time. Consequently much 
labour is represented in a small compass. Jacob doubts whether 
gold has ever been paid for at its full value. This applies still 
more to diamonds. According to Eschwege, the total produce of 
the Brazilian diamond mines for the eighty years, ending in 1823, 
had not realised the price of one-and-a-half years' average produce 
of the sugar and coffee plantations of the same country, although 
the diamonds cost much more labour, and therefore represented 
more value. With richer mines, the same quantity of labour would 
embody itself in more diamonds, and their value would fall. 
If we could succeed at a small expenditure of labour, in converting 
carbon into diamonds, their value might fall below that of bricks. 
In general, the greater the productiveness of labour, the less is 
the labour-time required for the production of an article, the less 
is the amount of labour crystallised in that article, and the less is 
its value; and vice versa, the less the productiveness of labour, the 
greater is the labour-time required for the production of an article, 
and the greater is its value. The value of a commodity, there- 
fore, varies directly as the quantity, and inversely as the produc- 
tiveness, of the labour incorporated in it. ||A thing can be a use-value, without having value. This is 
the case whenever its utility to man is not due to labour. Such 
are air, virgin soil, uatural meadows, &c. A thing can be useful, 
and the product of human labour, without being a commodity. 
Whoever directly satisfies his wants with the produce of his own 
labour, creates, indeed, use-values, but not commodities. In order ||to produce the latter, he must not only produce use-values, but 
use-values for others, social use-values. (And not only for others, 
without more. The mediaeval peasant produced quit-rent-corn 
for his feudal lord and tithe-corn for his parson. But neither the 
quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became commodities by reason 
of the fact that they had been produced for others. To become a 
commodity a product must be transferred to another, whom it 
will serve as a use-value, by means of an exchange.) 1 Lastly 
nothing can have value, without being an object of utility. If 
the thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour 
does not count as labour, and therefore creates no value. ||At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex 
of two things — use-value and exchange-value. Later on, we saw 
also that labour, too, possesses the same two-fold nature; for, so 
far as it finds expression in value, it does not possess the same 
characteristics that belong to it as a creator of use-values. I was 
the first to point out and to examine critically this two-fold nature 
of the labour contained in commodities. As this point is the 
pivot on which a clear comprehension of Political Economy turns, 
we must go more into detail. ||The coat is a use-value that satisfies a particular want. Its 
existence is the result of a special sort of productive activity, the 
nature of which is determined by its aim, mode of operation, 
subject, means, and result. The labour, whose utility is thus 
represented by the value in use of its product, or which mani- 
fests itself by making its product a use-value, we call useful 
labour. In this connexion we consider only its useful effect. ||To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond 
as many different kinds of useful labour, classified according to the 
order, genus, species, and variety to which they belong in the 
social division of labour. This division of labour is a necessary 
condition for the production of commodities, but it does not 
follow, conversely, that the production of commodities is a 
necessary condition for the division of labour. In the primitive 
Indian community there is social division of labour, without 
production of commodities. Or, to take an example nearer home, 
in every factory the labour is divided according to a system, but 
this division is not brought about by the operatives mutually 
exchanging their individual products. Only such products can 
become commodities with regard to each other, as result from 
different kinds of labour, each kind being carried on independ- 
ently and for the account of private individuals. ||To resume, then: In the use-value of each commodity there 
is contained useful labour, i.e., productive activity of a definite 
kind and exercised with a definite aim. Use-values cannot con- 
front each other as commodities, unless the useful labour em- 
bodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them. In a 
community, the produce of which in general takes the form of 
commodities, i.e., in a community of commodity producers, this 
qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are 
carried on independently by individual producers, each on 
their own account, develops into a complex system, a social 
division of labour. ||Anyhow, whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his 
customer, in either case it operates as a use-value. Nor is the 
relation between the coat and the labour that produced it altered 
by the circumstance that tailoring may have become a special 
trade, an independent branch of the social division of labour. 
Wherever the want of clothing forced them to it, the human race 
made clothes for thousands of years, without a single man becom- 
ing a tailor. But coats and linen, like every other element of 
material wealth that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, 
must invariably owe their existence to a special productive activ- 
ity, exercised with a definite aim, an activity that appropriates 
particular nature-given materials to particular human wants. 
So far therefore as labour is a creator of use-value, is useful labour, 
it is a necessary condition, independent of all forms of society, 
for the existence of the human race; it is an eternal nature- ||The use-values, coat, linen, &c, i.e., the bodies of commodi- 
ties, are combinations of two elements— matter and labour. 
If we take away the useful labour expended upon them, a mate- 
rial substratum is always left, which is furnished by Nature 
without the help of man. The latter can work only as Nature does, 
that is by changing the form of matter. 1 Nay more, in this work of 
changing the form he is constantly helped by natural forces. We 
see, then, that labour is not the only source of material wealth, of 
use-values produced by labour. As William Petty puts it, labour 
is its father and the earth its mother. ||By our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the 
linen. But this is a mere quantitative difference, which for the 
present does not concern us. We bear in mind, however, that 
if the value of the coat is double that of 10 yds. of linen, 20 yds. 
of linen must have the same value as one coat. So far as they are 
values, the coat and the linen are things of a like substance, objec- 
tive expressions of essentially identical labour. But tailoring and 
weaving are, qualitatively, different kinds of labour. There are, 
however, states of society in which one and the same man does 
tailoring and weaving alternately, in which case these two forms 
of labour are mere modifications of the labour of the same indi- 
vidual, and no special and fixed functions of different persons; 
just as the coat which our tailor makes one day, and the trousers 
which he makes another day, imply only a variation in the labour 
of one and the same individual. Moreover, we see at a glance that, 
in our capitalist society, a given portion of human labour is, in 
accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the 
form of tailoring, at another in the form of weaving. This change ||1 Tutti i fenomeni dell' universo, sieno essi prodotti della mano dell' 
uomo, ovvero delle universali leggi della fisica, non ci danno idea di attuale 
creazione, ma unicamente di una modi ficazi one della materia. Accostare e 
separare sono gli unici elementi che l'ingegno umano ritrova analizzando 
l'idea della riproduzione: e tanto e riproduzione di valore (value in use, 
although Verri in this passage of his controversy with the Physiocrats is 
not himself quite certain of the kind of value he is speaking of) e di ricchezze 
se la terra, l'aria e l'acqua ne' campi si trasmutino in grano. come se colla 
mano dell'uomo il glutine di un insetto si trasmuti in velluto ovvero alcuni 
pezzetti di metallo si organizzino a formare una ripetizione."— Pietro 
Veri, "Meditazioni sulla Economia Politica" [first printed in 1773] inCus- 
todi's edition of the Italian Economists, Parte Moderna, t. XV., p. 22. ||Productive activity, if we leave out of sight its special form, 
viz., the useful character of the labour, is nothing but the ex- 
penditure of human labour-power. Tailoring and weaving, though 
qualitatively different productive activities, are each a productive 
expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles, and in this 
sense are human labour. They are but two different modes of ex- 
pending human labour-power. Of course, this labour-power, 
which remains the same under all its modifications, must have 
attained a certain pitch of development before it can be expended 
in a multiplicity of modes. But the value of a commodity repre- 
sents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure of human la- 
bour in general. And just as in society, a general or a banker plays 
a great part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby part, * 
so here with mere human labour. It is the expenditure of simple 
labour-power, i.e., of the labour-power which, on ^n average, apart 
from any special development, exists in the organism of every 
ordinary individual. Simple average labour, it is true, varies 
in character in different countries and at different times, but in 
a particular society it is given. Skilled labour counts only as 
simple labour intensified, or rather, as multiplied simple labour, 
a given quantity of skilled being considered equal to a greater 
quantity of simple labour. Experience shows that this reduction 
is constantly being made. A commodity may be the product of 
the most skilled labour, but its value, by equating it to the 
product of simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity 
of the latter labour alone. 2 The different proportions in which 
different sorts of labour are reduced to unskilled labour as their 
standard, are established by a social process that goes on behind 
the backs of the producers, and, consequently, appear to be fixed 
by custom. For simplicity's sake we shall henceforth account 
every kind of labour to be unskilled, simple labour; by this we 
do no more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction. ||and linen, are combinations of special productive activities with 
cloth and yarn, while the values, coat and linen, are, on the other 
hand, mere homogeneous congelations of undifferentiated labour, 
so the labour embodied in these latter values does not count by 
virtue of its productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only as 
being expenditure of human labour-power. Tailoring and weav- 
ing are necessary factors in the creation of the use-values, coat 
and linen, precisely because these two kinds of labour are of differ- 
ent qualities; but only in so far as abstraction is made from their 
special qualities, only in so far as both possess the same quality 
of being human labour, do tailoring and weaving form the sub- 
stance of the values of the same articles. ||Coats and linen, however, are not merely values, but values 
of definite magnitude, and according to our assumption, the coat 
is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen. Whence this 
di (Terence in their values? It is owing to the fact that the linen 
contains only half as much labour as the coat, and consequently, 
that in the production of the latter, labour-power must have been 
expended during twice the time necessary for the production of 
the former. ||While, therefore, with reference to use-value, the labour con- 
tained in a commodity counts only qualitatively, with reference 
to value it counts only quantitatively, and must first be reduced 
to human labour pure and simple. In the former case, it is a ques- 
tion of How and What, in the latter of How much? How long a 
time? Since the magnitude of the value of a commodity represents 
only the quantity of labour embodied in it, it follows that all 
commodities, when taken in certain proportions, must be equal 
in value. ||If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful 
labour required for the production of a coat remains unchanged, 
the sum of the values of the coats produced increases with their 
number. If one coat represents x days' labour, two coats represent 
2x days' labour, and so on. But assume that the duration of the 
labour necessary for the production of a coat becomes doubled or 
halved. In the first case, one coat is worth as much as two coats 
were before; in the second case, two coats are only worth as much as 
one was before, although in both cases one coat renders the same 
service as before, and the useful labour embodied in it remains 
of the same quality. But the quantity of labour spent on its 
production has altered. ||one coat only one man. Nevertheless, an increased quantity of 
material wealth may correspond to a simultaneous fall in the mag- 
nitude of its value. This antagonistic movement has its origin 
in the two-fold character of labour. Productive power has reference, 
of course, only to labour of some useful concrete form, the efficacy 
of any special productive activity during a given time being de- 
pendent on its productiveness. Useful labour becomes, therefore, 
a more or less abundant source of products, in proportion to the 
rise or fall of its productiveness. On the other hand, no change in 
this productiveness affects the labour represented by value. 
Since productive power is an attribute of the concrete useful forms 
of labour, of course it can no longer have any bearing on that la- 
bour, so soon as we make abstraction from those concrete useful 
forms. However then productive power may vary, the same labour, 
exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal amounts 
of value. But it will yield, during equal periods of time, dif- 
ferent quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power 
rise, fewer, if it fall. The same change in productive power, which 
increases the fruitfulness of labour, and, in consequence, the 
quantity of use-values produced by that labour, will diminish 
the total value of this increased quantity of use-values, provided 
such change shorten the total labour-time necessary for their 
production; and vice versa. ||On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically, an 
expenditure of human labour-power, and in its character of iden- 
tical abstract human labour, it creates and forms the value of 
commodities. On the other hand, all labour is the expenditure 
of human labour-power in a special form and with a definite aim, 
and in this, its character of concrete useful labour, it produces 
use-values. * ||1 In order to prove that labour alone is that all-sufficient and real 
measure, by which at all times the value of all commodities can be esti- 
mated and compared, Adam Smith says, "Equal quantities of labour must at 
all times and in all places have the same value for the labourer. In his nor- 
mal state of health, strength, and activity, and with the average degree of 
skill that he may possess, he must always give up the same portion of his 
rest, his freedom, and his happiness." ("Wealth of Nations," b. I. ch.V.) On 
the one hand, Adam Smith here (but not everywhere) confuses the determi- 
nation of value by means of the quantity of labour expended in the produc- 
tion of commodities, with the determination of the values of commodities 
by means of the value of labour, and seeks in consequence to prove that equal 
quantities of labour have always the same value On the other hand, he has 
a presentiment, that labour, so far as it manifests itself in the value of com- 
modities, counts only as expenditure of labour-power, but he treats this ex- 
penditure as the mere sacrifice of rest, freedom, and happiness, not as at the ||Commodities come into the world in the shape of use-values, 
articles, or goods, such as iron, linen, corn, &c. This is their 
plain, homely, bodily form. They are, however, commodities, 
only because they are something two-fold, both objects of utility, 
and, at the same time, depositories of value. They manifest 
themselves therefore as commodities, or have the form of com- 
modities, only in so far as they have two forms, a physical or 
natural form, and a value-form. ||The reality of the value of commodities differs in this respect 
from Dame Quickly, that we don't know "where to have it." 
The value of commodities is the very opposite of the coarse mate- 
riality of their substance, not an atom of matter enters into its 
composition. Turn and examine a single commodity, by itself, 
as we will, yet in so far as it remains an object of value, it seems 
impossible to grasp it. If, however, we bear in mind that the 
value of commodities has a purely social reality, and that they 
acquire this reality only in so far as they are expressions or em- 
bodiments of one identical social substance, viz., human labour, 
it follows as a matter of course, that value can only manifest 
itself in the social relation of commodity to commodity. In fact 
we started from exchange-value, or the exchange relation of com- 
modities, in order to get at the value that lies hidden behind it. 
We must now return to this form under which value first appeared 
to us. ||Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities 
have a value-form common to them all, and presenting a marked 
contrast with the varied bodily forms of their use-values. I mean 
their money-form. Here, however, a task is set us, the perform- 
ance of which has never yet even been attempted by bourgeois 
economy, the task of tracing the genesis of this money-form, of ||same time the normal activity of living beings. But then, he has the modern 
wage-labourer in his eye. Much more aptly, the anonymous predecessor 
of Adam Smith, quoted above in Note 1, p. 39, says "one man has employed 
himself a week in providing this necessary of life .. and he that gives him some 
other in exchange, cannot make a better estimate of what is a proper equiva- 
lent, than by computing what cost him just as much labour and time; which 
in effect is no more than exchanging one man's labour in one thing for a 
time certain, for another man's labour in another thing for the same time." 
(1. c, p. 39.) [The English language has the advantage of possessing different 
words for the two aspects of labour here considered. The labour which cre- 
ates Use-Value, and counts qualitatively is Work, as distinguished from 
Labour; that which creates Value and counts quantitatively, is Labour 
as distinguished from Work. — F. E.\ ||Here two different kinds of commodities (in our example 
the linen and the coat), evidently play two different parts. The 
linen expresses its value in the coat; the coat serves as the mate- 
rial in which that value is expressed. The former plays an active, 
the latter a passive, part. The value of the linen is represented as 
relative value, or appears in relative form. The coat officiates as 
equivalent, or appears in equivalent form. ||The relative form and the equivalent form are two intimately 
connected, mutually dependent and inseparable elements of the 
expression of value; but, at the same time, are mutually exclusive, 
antagonistic extremes — i.e., poles of the same expression. They are 
allotted respectively to the two different commodities brought into 
relation by that expression. It is not possible to express the value 
of linen in linen. 20 yards of linen =20 yards of linen is no ex- 
pression of value. On the contrary, such an equation merely says 
that 20 yards of linen are nothing else than 20 yards of linen, a 
definite quantity of the use-value linen. The value of the linen can 
therefore be expressed only relatively — i.e., in some other com- 
modity. The relative form of the value of the linen pre-supposes, 
therefore, the presence of some other commodity— here the coat- 
under the form of an equivalent. On the other hand, the commodity 
that figures as the equivaleni caunot at the same time assume the ||No doubt, the expression 20 yards of linen=l coat, or 20 
yards of linen are worth 1 coat, implies the opposite relation: 1 
coat =20 yards of linen, or 1 coat is worth 20 yards of linen. 
But, in that case, I must reverse the equation, in order to express 
the value of the coat relatively; and, so soon as I do that, the linen 
becomes the equivalent instead of the coat. A single commodity 
cannot, therefore, simultaneously assume, in the same expres- 
sion of value, both forms. The very polarity of these forms makes 
them mutually exclusive. ||In order to discover how the elementary expression of the value 
of a commodity lies hidden in the value-relation of two commodi- 
ties, we must, in the first place, consider the latter entirely apart 
from its quantitative aspect. The usual mode of procedure is gen- 
erally the reverse, and in the value-relation nothing is seen but 
the proportion between definite quantities of two different sorts of 
commodities that are considered equal to each other. It is apt to 
be forgotten that the magnitudes of different things can be com- 
pared quantitatively, only when those magnitudes are expressed 
in terms of the same unit. It is only as expressions of such a unit 
that they are of the same denomination, and therefore commensu- 
rable. l ||i The few economists, amongst whom is S. Bailey, who have occupied 
themselves with the analysis of the form of value, have been unable to arrive 
at any result, first, because they confuse the form of value with value itseli; 
and second, because, under the coarse influence of the practical bourgeois, 
they exclusively give their attention to the quantitative aspect oi the ques- 
tion. "The command of quantity ... constitutes value." ("Money and its 
Vicissitudes." London, 1837, p. 11. By S. Bailey.) ||But the two commodities whose identity of quality is thus 
assumed, do not play the same part. It is only the value of the linen 
that is expressed. And how? By its reference to the coat as its 
equivalent, as something that can be exchanged for it. In this 
relation the coat is the mode of existence of value, is value em- 
bodied, for only as such is it the same as the linen. On the other 
hand, the linen's own value comes to the front, receives independ- 
ent expression, for it is only as being value that it is comparable 
with the coat as a thing of equal value, or exchangeable with 
the coat. To borrow an illustration from chemistry, butyric acid 
is a different substance from propyl formate. Yet both are made 
up of the same chemical substances, carbon (G), hydrogen (H), and 
oxygen (0), and that, too, in like proportions— namely, C 4 H 8 2 . 
If now we equate butyric acid to propyl formate, then, in the first 
place, propyl formate would be, in this relation, merely a form of 
existence of G 4 H 8 2 ; and in the second place, we should be stating 
that butyric acid also consists of C 4 H 8 2 . Therefore, by thus 
equating the two substances, expression would be given to their 
chemical composition, while their different physical forms would 
be neglected. ||If we say that, as values, commodities are mere congelations 
of human labour, we reduce them by our analysis, it is true, 
to the abstraction, value; but we ascribe to this value no form 
apart from their bodily form. It is otherwise in the value- 
relation of one commodity to another. Here, the one stands 
forth in its character of value by reason of its relation to the 
other. ||By making the coat the equivalent of the linen, we equate 
the labour embodied in the former to that in the latter. Now, 
it is true that the tailoring, which makes the coat, is concrete 
labour of a different sort from the weaving which makes the linen. 
But the act of equating it to the weaving, reduces the tailoring 
to that which is really equal in the two kinds of labour, to their 
common character of human labour. In this roundabout way, 
then, the fact is expressed, that weaving also, in so far as it weaves 
value, has nothing to distinguish it from tailoring, and, conse- 
quently, is abstract human labour. It is the expression of equiv- 
alence between different sorts of commodities that alone brings 
into relief the specific character of value-creating labour, and 
this it does by actually reducing the different varieties of labour ||There is, however, something else required beyond the ex- 
pression of the specific character of the labour of which the 
value of the linen consists. Human labour-power in motion, or 
human labour, creates value, but is not itself value. It becomes 
value only in its congealed state, when embodied in the form 
of some object. In order to express the value of the linen as a 
congelation of human labour, that value must be expressed 
as having objective existence, as being a something materially 
different from the linen itself, and yet a something common to 
the linen and all other commodities. The problem is already 
solved. ||When occupying the position of equivalent in the equation 
of value, the coat ranks qualitatively as the equal of the linen, 
as something of the same kind, because it is value. In this position 
it is a thing in which we see nothing but value, or whose palpable 
bodily form represents value. Yet the coat itself, the body of the 
commodity, coat, is a mere use-value. A coat as such no more 
tells us it is value, than does the first piece of linen we take hold of. 
This shows that when placed in value-relation to the linen, the 
coat signifies more than when out of that relation, just as many a 
man strutting about in a gorgeous uniform counts for more than 
when in mufti. ||In the production of the coat, human labour-power, in the 
shape of tailoring, must have been actually expended. Human 
labour is therefore accumulated in it. In this aspect the coat is 
a depository of value, but though worn to a thread, it does not 
let this fact show through. And as equivalent of the linen in the 
value equation, it exists under this aspect alone, counts therefore 
as embodied value, as a body that is value. A, for instance, cannot 
be "your majesty" to B, unless at the same time majesty in B's 
eyes assumes the bodily form of A, and, what is more, with every ||1 The celebrated Franklin, one of the first economists, after Wm. 
Petty, who saw through the nature of value, says: "Trade in general being 
nothing else but the exchange of labour for labour, the value of all things 
is ... most justly measured by labour" ("The works of B. Franklin, &c," 
edited by Sparks. Boston, 1836, Vol. II., p. 267.) Franklin is unconscious 
that by estimating the value of everything in labour, he makes abstrac- 
tion from any difference in the sorts of labour exchanged, and thus reduces 
them all to equal human labour. But although ignorant of this, yet he says 
it. He speaks first of "the one labour," then of "the other labour," and finally 
of "labour " without further qualification, as the substance of the value of 
everything. ||Hence, in the value equation, in which the coat is the equiva- 
lent of the linen, the coat officiates as the form of value. The value 
of the commodity linen is expressed by the bodily form of the 
commodity coat, the value of one by the use-value of the other. 
As a use-value, the linen is something palpably different from 
the coat; as value, it is the same as the coat, and now has the ap- 
pearance of a coat. Thus the linen acquires a value-form different 
from its physical form. The fact that it is value, is made mani- 
fest by its equality with the coat, just as the sheep's nature of a 
Christian is shown in his resemblance to the Lamb of God. ||We see, then, all that our analysis of the value of commod- 
ities has already told us, is told us by the linen itself, so soon 
as it comes into communication with another commodity, the 
coat. Only it betrays its thoughts in that language with which 
alone it is familiar, the language of commodities. In order to tell 
us that its own value is created by labour in its abstract character 
of human labour, it says that the coat, in so far as it is worth as 
much as the linen, and therefore is value, consists of the same la- 
bour as the linen. In order to inform us that its sublime reality 
as value is not the same as its buckram body, it says that value 
has the appearance of a coat, and consequently that so far as the 
linen is value, it and the coat are as like as two peas. We may 
here remark, that the language of commodities has, besides Heb- 
rew, many other more or less correct dialects. The German "Wert- 
sein," to be worth, for instance, expresses in a less striking man- 
ner than the Romance verbs "valere," "valer," "valoir," that the 
equating of commodity B to commodity A, is commodity A's own 
mode of expressing its value. Paris vaut bien une messe. ||By means, therefore, of the value-relation expressed in our 
equation, the bodily form of commodity B becomes the value- 
form of commodity A, or the body of commodity B acts as a 
mirror to the value of commodity A. 1 By putting itself in rela- 
tion with commodity B, as value in propria persona, as the matter 
of which human labour is made up, the commodity A converts ||1 In a sort of way, it is with man as with commodities. Since he comes 
into the world neither with a looking glass in his hand, nor as a Fichtian 
philosopher, to whom "I am I" is sufficient, man first sees and recognises 
himself in other men. Peter only establishes his own identity as a man by 
first comparing himself with Paul as being of like kind. And thereby Paul, 
just as he stands in his Pauline personality, becomes to Peter the type of 
the genus homo. ||Every commodity, whose value it is intended to express, is a 
useful object of given quantity, as 15 bushels of corn, or 100 
lbs. of coffee. And a given quantity of any commodity contains a 
definite quantity of human labour. The value-form must therefore 
not only express value generally, but also value in definite quan- 
tity. Therefore, in the value-relation of commodity A to commodity 
B, of the linen to the coat, not only is the latter, as value in gen- 
eral, made the equal in quality of the linen, but a definite quantity 
of coat (1 coat) is made the equivalent of a definite quantity 
(20 yards) of linen. ||The equation, 20 yards of linen =1 coat, or 20 yards of linen 
are worth one coat, implies that the same quantity of value-sub- 
stance (congealed labour) is embodied in both; that the two com- 
modities have each cost the same amount of labour of the same 
quantity of labour-time. But the labour-time necessary for the 
production of 20 yards of linen or 1 coat varies with every change 
in the productiveness of weaving or tailoring. We have now to 
consider the influence of such changes on the quantitative aspect 
of the relative expression of value. ||I. Let the value of the linen vary, x that of the coat remaining 
constant. If, say in consequence of the exhaustion of flax-growing 
soil, the labour-time necessary for the production of the linen be 
doubled, the value of the linen will also be doubled. Instead of 
the equation, 20 yards of linen=l coat, we should have 20 yards 
of linen=2 coats, since 1 coat would now contain only half the 
labour-time embodied in 20 yards of linen. If, on the other hand, 
in consequence, say, of improved looms, this labour-time be re- 
duced by one-half, the value of the linen would fall by one-half. 
Consequently, we should have 20 yards of linen = l A coat. The 
relative value of commodity A, i.e., its value expressed in com- 
modity B, rises and falls directly as the value of A, the value of 
B being supposed constant. ||for the production of a coat becomes doubled, we have instead of 
20 yards of linen =1 coat, 20 yards of linen =^2 coat. If, on the 
other hand, the value of the coat sinks by one-half, then 20 yards 
of linen =2 coats. Hence, if the value of commodity A remain 
constant, its relative value expressed in commodity B rises and 
falls inversely as the value of B. ||If we compare the different cases in I. and II., we see that the 
same change of magnitude in relative value may arise from to- 
tally opposite causes. Thus, the equation, 20 yards of linen 
=1 coat, becomes 20 yards of linen=2 coats, either, because 
the value of the linen has doubled, or because the value of the 
coat has fallen by one-half; and it becomes 20 yards of linen 
= % coat, either, because the value of the linen has fallen by one- 
half, or because the value of the coat has doubled. ||III. Let the quantities of labour-time respectively neces- 
sary for the production of the linen and the coat vary simul- 
taneously in the same direction and in the same proportion. In 
this case 20 yards of linen continue equal to 1 coat, however 
much their values may have altered. Their change of value is 
seen as soon as they are compared with a third commodity, whose 
value has remained constant. If the values of all commodities 
rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same proportion, their 
relative values would remain unaltered. Their real change of value 
would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of com- 
modities produced in a given time. ||IV. The labour-time respectively necessary for the production 
of the linen and the coat, and therefore the value of these com- 
modities may simultaneously vary in the same direction, but at 
unequal rates, or in opposite directions, or in other ways. The 
effect of all these possible different variations, on the relative 
value of a commodity, may be deduced from the results of I., II., 
and III. ||Thus real changes in the magnitude of value are neither un- 
equivocally nor exhaustively reflected in their relative expression, 
that is, in the equation expressing the magnitude of relative 
value. The relative value of a commodity may vary, although its 
value remains constant. Its relative value may remain constant, 
although its value varies; and finally, simultaneous variations 
in the magnitude of value and in that of its relative expression 
by no means necessarily correspond in amount. * ||We have seen that commodity A (the linen), by expressing 
its value in the use-value of a commodity differing in kind (the 
coat), at the same time impresses upon the latter a specific form 
of value, namely that of the equivalent. The commodity linen 
manifests its quality of having a value by the fact that the coat, 
without having assumed a value-form different from its bodily 
form, is equated to the linen. The fact that the latter therefore 
has a value is expressed by saying that the coat is directly ex- 
changeable with it. Therefore, when we say that a commodity 
is in the equivalent form, we express the fact that it is directly ex- 
changeable with other commodities. ||When one commodity, such as a coat, serves as the equivalent 
of another, such as linen, and coats consequently acquire the 
characteristic property of being directly exchangeable with linen, 
we are far from knowing in what proportion the two are ex- 
changeable. The value of the linen being given in magnitude, that 
proportion depends on the value of the coat. Whether the coat 
serves as the equivalent and the linen as relative value, or the 
linen as the equivalent and the coat as relative value, the magni- 
tude of the coat's value is determined, independently of its value- 
form, by the labour-time necessary for its production. But when- 
ever the coat assumes in the equation of value, the position of 
equivalent, its value acquires no quantitative expression; on the ||omists. For example — "Once admit that A tails, because B, with which, 
it is exchanged, rises, while no less labour is bestowed in the mean-' 
time on A, and your general principle of value falls to the ground.... If he 
[Ricardo] allowed that when A rises in value relatively to B, B falls in value 
relatively to A, he cut away the ground on which he rested his grand propo- 
sition, that the value of a commodity is ever determined by the labour em- 
bodied in it; for if a change in the cost of A alters not only its own value in 
relation to B, for which it is exchanged, but also the value of B relatively 
to that of A, though no change has taken place in the quantity of labour to 
produce B, then not only the doctrine falls to the ground which asserts that 
the quantity of labour bestowed on an article regulates its value, but also 
that which affirms the cost of an article to regulate its value." (J Broadhurst: 
"Political Economy," London, 1842, pp. 11 and 14.) ||&c, the number 10 remains unchanged, and yet its proportional magnitude, 
its magnitude relatively to the numbers 20. 50, 100, &c, continually dimin- 
ishes. Therefore the great principle that the magnitude of a whole number, 
such as 10, is "regulated" by the number of times unity is contained in it, 
falls to the ground.— [The author explains in section 4 of this chapter, 
pp. 80-81, note 2, what he understands by "Vulgar Economy."—/?'. E.) ||For instance, 40 yards of linen are worth — what? 2 coats. 
Because the commodity coat here plays the part of equivalent, 
because the use-value coat, as opposed to the linen, figures as an 
embodiment of value, therefore a definite number of coats suffices 
to express the definite quantity of value in the linen. Two coats 
may therefore express the quantity of value of 40 yards of linen, 
but they can never express the quantity of their own value. A 
superficial observation of this fact, namely, that in the equation 
of value, the equivalent figures exclusively as a simple quantity 
of some article, of some use-value, has misled Bailey, as also many 
others, both before and after him, into seeing, in the expression 
of value, merely a quantitative relation. The truth being, that 
when a commodity acts as equivalent, no quantitative determi- 
nation of its value is expressed. ||The bodily form of the commodity becomes its value-form. 
But, mark well, that this quid pro quo exists in the case of any 
commodity B, only when some other commodity A enters into 
a value-relation with it, and then only within the limits of this 
relation. Since no commodity can stand in the relation of equiva- 
lent to itself, and thus turn its own bodily shape into the expres- 
sion of its own value, every commodity is compelled to choose 
some other commodity for its equivalent, and to accept the use- 
value, that is to say, the bodily shape of that other commodity as 
the form of its own value. ||One of the measures that we apply to commodities as material 
substances, as use-values, will serve to illustrate this point. A 
sugar-loaf being a body, is heavy, and therefore has weight: 
but we can neither see nor touch this weight. We then take various 
pieces of iron, whose weight has been determined beforehand. 
The iron, as iron, is no more the form of manifestation of weight, 
than is the sugar-loaf. Nevertheless, in order to express the sugar- 
loaf as so much weight, we put it into a weight-relation with the 
iron. In this relation, the iron officiates as a body representing 
nothing but weight. A certain quantity of iron therefore serves as 
the measure of the weight of the sugar, and represents, in relation 
to the sugar-loaf, weight embodied, the form of manifestation of 
weight. This part is played by the iron only within this relation, 
into which the sugar or any other body, whose weight has to be ||determined, enters with the iron. Were they not both heavy, they 
could not enter into this relation, and the one could therefore not 
serve as the expression of the weight of the other. When we throw 
both into the scales, we see in reality, that as weight they are both 
the same, and that, therefore, when taken in proper proportions, 
they have the same weight. Just as the substance iron, as a measure 
of weight, represents in relation to the sugar-loaf weight alone, so, 
in our expression of value, the material object, coat, in relation 
to the linen, represents value alone. ||Since the relative form of value of a commodity — the linen, 
for example — expresses the value of that commodity, as being 
something wholly different from its substance and properties, as 
being, for instance, coat-like, we see that this expression itself 
indicates that some social relation lies at the bottom of it. With 
the equivalent form it is just the contrary. The very essence of 
this form is that the material commodity itself — the coat — just 
as it is, expresses value, and is endowed with the form of value 
by Nature itself. Of course this holds good only so long as the 
value-relation exists, in which the coat stands in the position of 
equivalent to the linen. x Since, however, the properties of a thing 
are not the result of its relations to other things, but only manifest 
themselves in such relations, the coat seems to be endowed with 
its equivalent form, its property of being directly exchangeable, 
just as much by Nature as it is endowed with the property of 
being heavy, or the capacity to keep us warm. Hence the enigmat- 
ical character of the equivalent form which escapes the notice 
of the bourgeois political economist, until this form, completely 
developed, confronts him in the shape of money. He then seeks 
to explain away the mystical character of gold and silver, by sub- 
stituting for them less dazzling commodities, and by reciting, 
with ever renewed satisfaction, the catalogue of all possible com- 
modities which at one time or another have played the part of 
equivalent. He has not the least suspicion that the most simple ||The body of the commodity that serves as the equivalent, 
figures as the materialisation of human labour in the abstract, 
and is at the same time the product of some specifically useful 
concrete labour. This concrete labour becomes, therefore, the 
medium for expressing abstract human labour. If on the one hand 
the coat ranks as nothing but the embodiment of abstract human 
labour, so, on the other hand, the tailoring which is actually 
embodied in it, counts as nothing but the form under which that 
abstract labour is realised. In the expression of value of the linen, 
the utility of the tailoring consists, not in making clothes, but 
in making an object, which we at once recognise to be Value, and 
therefore to be a congelation of labour, but of labour indistin- 
guishable from that realised in the value of the linen. In order to 
act as such a mirror of value, the labour of tailoring must reflect 
nothing besides its own abstract quality of being human labour 
generally. ||In tailoring, as well as in weaving, human labour-power is 
expended. Both, therefore, possess the general property of being 
human labour, and may, therefore, in certain cases, such as in 
the production of value, have to be considered under this aspect 
alone. There is nothing mysterious in this. But in the expression 
of value there is a complete turn of the tables. For instance, how 
is the fact to be expressed that weaving creates the value of the 
linen, not by virtue of being weaving, as such, but by reason of 
its general property of being human labour? Simply by opposing 
to weaving that other particular form of concrete labour (in this 
instance tailoring), which produces the equivalent of the product 
of weaving. Just as the coat in its bodily form became a direct 
expression of value, so now does tailoring, a concrete form of 
labour, appear as the direct and palpable embodiment of human 
labour generally. ||But because this concrete labour, tailoring in our case, ranks 
as, and is directly identified with, undifferentiated human la- 
bour, it also ranks as identical with any other sort of labour, and 
therefore with that embodied in the linen. Consequently, al- 
though, like all other commodity-producing labour, it is the labour 
of private individuals, yet, at the same time, it ranks as labour 
directly social in its character. This is the reason why it results ||He further sees that the value-relation which gives rise to 
this expression makes it necessary that the house should quali- 
tatively be made the equal of the bed, and that, without such 
an equalisation, these two clearly different things could not be 
compared with each other as commensurable quantities. "Ex- 
change," he says, "cannot take place without equality, and equal- 
ity not without commensurability" (out' igottj; jjtj obarfc aujAjAsipiac). 
Here, however, he comes to a stop, and gives up the further anal- 
ysis of the form of value. "It is, however, in reality, impossible 
(it; jjlsv gov akrfisia dSovaiov), that such unlike things can be com- 
mensurable"— i.e., qualitatively equal. Such an equalisation can 
only be something foreign to their real nature, consequently 
only "a makeshift for practical purposes." ||Aristotle therefore, himself, tells us, what barred the way to 
his further analysis; it was the absence of any concept of value. 
What is that equal something, that common substance, which 
admits of the value of the beds being expressed by a house? Such 
a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle. And why not? 
Compared with the beds, the house does represent something 
equal to them, in so far as it represents what is really equal, both 
in the beds and the house. And that is — human labour. ||merely a mode of expressing all labour as equal human labour, 
and consequently as labour of equal quality. Greek society was 
founded upon slavery, and had, therefore, for its natural basis, 
the inequality of men and of their labour-powers. The secret of 
the expression of value, namely, that all kinds of labour are equal 
and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in 
general, cannot be deciphered, until the notion of human equality 
has already acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice. This, 
however, is possible only in a society in which the great mass of 
the produce of labour takes the form of commodities, in which, 
consequently, the dominant relation between man and man, 
is that of owners of commodities. The brilliancy of Aristotle's 
genius is shown by this alone, that he discovered, in the 
expression of the value of commodities, a relation of equality. 
The peculiar conditions of the society in which he lived, alone 
prevented him from discovering what, "in truth," was at the 
bottom of this equality. ||The elementary form of value of a commodity is contained 
in the equation, expressing its value-relation to another com- 
modity of a different kind, or in its exchange-relation to the same. 
The value of commodity A, is qualitatively expressed, by the 
fact that commodity B is directly exchangeable with it. Its 
value is quantitatively expressed by the fact, that a definite 
quantity of B is exchangeable with a definite quantity of A. In 
other words, the value of a commodity obtains independent 
and definite expression, by taking the form of exchange-value. 
When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said, in common par- 
lance, that a commodity is both a use-value and an exchange- 
value, we were, accurately speaking, wrong. A commodity is a 
use-value or object of utility, and a value. It manifests itself as 
this two-fold thing, that it is, as soon as its value assumes an 
independent form — viz., the form of exchange-value. It never 
assumes this form when isolated, but only when placed in a value 
or exchange relation with another commodity of a different kind. 
When once we know this, such a mode of expression does no harm; 
it simply serves as an abbreviation. ||of the mercantilists and their recent revivers, Ferrier, Ganilh, l 
and others, as also of their antipodes, the modern bagmen of 
Free-trade, such as Bastiat. The mercantilists lay special stress on 
the qualitative aspect of the expression of value, and consequent- 
ly on the equivalent form of commodities, which attains its full 
perfection in money. The modern hawkers of Free-trade, who must 
get rid of their article at any price, on the other hand, lay most 
stress on the quantitative aspect of the relative form of value. 
For them there consequently exists neither value, nor magnitude of 
value, anywhere except in its expression by means of the exchange- 
relation of commodities, that is, in the daily list of prices current. 
Macleod, who has taken upon himself to dress up the confused 
ideas of Lombard Street in the most learned finery, is a successful 
cross between the superstitious mercantilists, and the enlightened 
Free-trade bagmen. ||A close scrutiny of the expression of the value of A in terms 
of B, contained in the equation expressing the value-relation of 
A to B, has shown us that, within that relation, the bodily form 
of A figures only as a use-value, the bodily form of B only as the 
form or aspect of value. The opposition or contrast existing inter- 
nally in each commodity between use-value and value, is, there- 
fore, made evident externally by two commodities being placed 
in such relation to each other, that the commodity whose value it 
is sought to express, figures directly as a mere use-value, while 
the commodity in which that value is to be expressed, figures di- 
rectly as mere exchange- value. Hence the elementary form of 
value of a commodity is the elementary form in which the contrast 
contained in that commodity, between use-value and value, 
becomes apparent. ||Every product of labour is, in all states of society, a use- 
value; but it is only at a definite historical epoch in a society's 
development that such a product becomes a commodity, viz., 
at the epoch when the labour spent on the production of a useful 
article becomes expressed as one of the objective qualities of 
that article, i.e., as its value. It therefore follows that the elemen- 
tary value-form is also the primitive form under which a product 
of labour appears historically as a commodity, and that the grad- 
ual transformation of such products into commodities, proceeds 
pari passu with the development of the value-form. ||The expression of the value of commodity A in terms of any 
other commodity B, merely distinguishes the value from the 
use-value of A, and therefore places A merely in a relation of 
exchange with a single different commodity, B; but it is still 
far from expressing A's qualitative equality, and quantitative 
proportionality, to all commodities. To the elementary relative 
value-form of a commodity, there corresponds the single equiv- 
alent form of one other commodity. Thus, in the relative expres- 
sion of value of the linen, the coat assumes the form of equiva- 
lent, or of being directly exchangeable, only in relation to a single 
commodity, the linen. ||Nevertheless, the elementary form of value passes by an easy 
transition into a more complete form. It is true that by means 
of the elementary form, the value of a commodity A, becomes 
expressed in terms of one, and only one, other commodity. But 
that one may be a commodity of any kind, coat, iron, corn, or 
anything else. Therefore, according as A is placed in relation 
with one or the other, we get for one and the same commodity, 
different elementary expressions of value. * The number of such 
possible expressions is limited only by the number of the differ- 
ent kinds of commodities distinct from it. The isolated expres- 
sion of A's value, is therefore convertible into a series, prolonged 
to any length, of the different elementary expressions of that value. ||a mirror of the linen's value. 1 It is thus, that for the first time, 
this value shows itself in its true light as a congelation of un- 
differentiated human labour. For the labour that creates it, now 
stands expressly revealed, as labour that ranks equally with 
every other sort of human labour, no matter what its form, wheth- 
er tailoring, ploughing, mining, &c, and no matter, therefore, 
whether it is realised in coats, corn, iron, or gold. The linen, by 
virtue of the form of its value, now stands in a social relation, 
no longer with only one other kind of commodity, but with the 
whole world of commodities. As a commodity, it is a citizen of 
that world. At the same time, the interminable series of value 
equations implies, that as regards the value of a commodity, it 
is a matter of indifference under what particular form, or kind, 
of use-value it appears. ||In the first form, 20 yds. of linen =1 coat, it might, for ought 
that otherwise appears, be pure accident, that these two com- 
modities are exchangeable in definite quantities. In the second 
form, on the contrary, we perceive at once the background that 
determines, and is essentially different from, this accidental 
appearance. The value of the linen remains unaltered in mag- 
nitude, whether expressed in coats, coffee, or iron, or in number- 
less different commodities, the property of as many different own- 
ers. The accidental relation between two individual commodity- 
owners disappears. It becomes plain, that it is not the exchange 
of commodities which regulates the magnitude of their value; 
but, on the contrary, that it is the magnitude of their value which 
controls their exchange proportions. ||1 For this reason, we can speak of the coat-value of the linen when 
its value is expressed in coats, or of its corn-value when expressed in corn, 
and so on. Every such expression tells us, that what appears in the use-values, 
coat, corn, &c, is the value of the linen. "The value of any commodity de- 
noting its relation in exchange, we may speak of it as ... corn-value, cloth- 
value, according to the commodity with which it is compared; and hence 
there are a thousand different kinds of value, as many kinds of value as there 
are commodities in existence, and all are equally real and equally nomi- 
nal." ("A Critical Dissertation on the Nature, Measures and Causes of Value: 
chiefly in reference to the writings of Mr. Ricardo and his followers." By the 
author of "Essays on the Formation, &c, of Opinions." London, 1825, 
p. 39.) S. Bailey, the author of this anonymous work, a work which in its 
day created much stir in England, fancied that, by thus pointing out the 
various relative expressions of one and the same value, he had proved the 
impossibility of any determination of the. concept of value. However narrow 
his own views may have been, yet, that he laid his finger on some serious 
defects in the Ricardian Theory, is proved by the animosity with which he 
was attacked by Ricardo's followers. See the Westminster Review for example. ||Each commodity, such as, coat, tea, corn, iron, &c, figures 
in the expression of value of the linen, as an equivalent, and, con- 
sequently, as a thing that is value. The bodily form of each of 
these commodities figures now as a particular equivalent form, one 
out of many. In the same way the manifold concrete useful kinds 
of labour, embodied in these different commodities, rank now 
as so many different forms of the realisation, or manifestation, 
of undifferentiated human labour. ||In the first place, the relative expression of value is incomplete 
because the series representing it is interminable. The chain of 
which each equation of value is a link, is liable at any moment 
to be lengthened by each new kind of commodity that comes into 
existence and furnishes the material for a fresh expression of value. 
In the second place, it is a many-coloured mosaic of disparate and 
independent expressions of value. And lastly, if, as must be the case, 
the relative value of each commodity in turn, becomes expressed in 
this expanded form, we get for each of them a relative value- 
form, different in every case, and consisting of an interminable 
series of expressions of value. The defects of the expanded relative 
value-form are reflected in the corresponding equivalent form. 
Since the bodily form of each single commodity is one particular 
equivalent form amongst numberless others, we have, on the 
whole, nothing but fragmentary equivalent forms, each excluding 
the others. In the same way, also, the special, concrete, useful 
kind of labour embodied in each particular equivalent, is pre- 
sented only as a particular kind of labour, and therefore not as an 
exhaustive representative of human labour generally. The latter, 
indeed, gains adequate manifestation in the totality of its mani- 
fold, particular, concrete forms. But, in that case, its expression 
in an infinite series is ever incomplete and deficient in unity. ||In fact, when a person exchanges his linen for many other 
commodities, and thus expresses its value in a series of other 
commodities, it necessarily follows, that the various owners of 
the latter exchange them for the linen, and consequently express 
the value of their various commodities in one and the same third 
commodity, the linen. If then, we reverse the series, 20 yards of 
linen =1 coat or =10 lbs. of tea, etc., that is to say, if "we give 
expression to the converse relation already implied in the series, 
we get, ||The first form, A, furnishes such equations as the following: — 
1 coat =20 yards of linen, 10 lbs. of tea =% a ton of iron. The value of 
the coat is equated to linen, that of the tea to iron. But to be 
equated to linen, and again to iron, is to be as different as are 
linen and iron. This form, it is plain, occurs practically only in the 
first beginning, when the products of labour are converted into 
commodities by accidental and occasional exchanges. ||The second form, B, distinguishes, in a more adequate manner 
than the first, the value of a commodity from its use-value; for 
the value of the coat is there placed in contrast under all possible 
shapes with the bodily form of the coat; it is equated to linen, to 
iron, to tea, in short, to everything else, only not to itself, the 
coat. On the other hand, any general expression of value common to 
all is directly excluded; for, in the equation of value of each com- 
modity, all other commodities now appear only under the form of ||The third and lastly developed form expresses the values of 
the whole world of commodities in terms of a single commodity 
set apart for the purpose, namely, the linen, and thus represents 
to us their values by means of their equality with linen. The 
value of every commodity is now, by being equated to linen, 
not only differentiated from its own use-value, but from all other 
use-values generally, and is, by that very fact, expressed as that 
which is common to all commodities. By this form, commodities 
are, for the first time, effectively brought into relation with one 
another as values, or made to appear as exchange-values. ||The two earlier forms either express the value of each com- 
modity in terms of a single commodity of a different kind, or in 
a series of many such commodities. In both cases, it is, so to say, 
the special business of each single commodity to find an expression 
for its value, and this it does without the help of the others. 
These others, with respect to the former, play the passive parts 
of equivalents. The general form of value, C, results from the joint 
action of the whole world of commodities, and from that alone. A 
commodity can acquire a general expression of its value only by all 
other commodities, simultaneously with it, expressing their values 
in the same equivalent; and every new commodity must follow 
suit. It thus becomes evident that, since the existence of commodities 
as values is purely social, this social existence can be expressed 
by the totality of their social relations alone, and consequently 
that the form of their value must be a socially recognised form. ||All commodities being equated to linen now appear not only 
as qualitatively equal as values generally, but also as values 
whose magnitudes are capable of comparison. By expressing the 
magnitudes of their values in one and the same material, the linen, 
those magnitudes are also compared with each other. For instance, 
10 lbs. of tea =20 yards of linen, and 40 lbs. of coffee =20 yards 
of linen. Therefore, 10 lbs. of tea =40 lbs. of coffee. In other words, 
there is contained in 1 lb. of coffee only one-fourth as much sub- 
stance of value — labour — as is contained in 1 lb. of tea. ||of all commodities; it therefore becomes directly exchangeable 
with all and every of them. The substance linen becomes the vis- 
ible incarnation, the social chrysalis state of every kind of human 
labour. Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individ- 
uals producing a particular article, linen, acquires in consequence 
a social character, the character of equality with all other kinds 
of labour. The innumerable equations of which the general form 
of value is composed, equate in turn the labour embodied in the 
linen to that embodied in every other commodity, and they thus 
convert weaving into the general form of manifestation of undiffer- 
entiated human labour. In this manner the labour realised in the 
values of commodities is presented not only under its negative 
aspect, under which abstraction is made from every concrete 
form and useful property of actual work, but its own positive 
nature is made to reveal itself expressly. The general value-form 
is the reduction of all kinds of actual labour to their common 
character of being human labour generally, of being the expendi- 
ture of human labour-power. ||The general value-form, which represents all products of 
labour as mere congelations of undifferentiated human labour, 
shows by its very structure that it is the social resume of the 
world of commodities. That form consequently makes it indispu- 
tably evident that in the world of commodities the character 
possessed by all labour of being human labour constitutes its 
specific social character. ||The primary or isolated relative form of value of one com- 
modity converts some other commodity into an isolated equivalent. 
The expanded form of relative value, which is the expression of 
the value of one commodity in terms of all other commodities, 
endows those other commodities with the character of particu- 
lar equivalents differing in kind. And lastly, a particular kind 
of commodity acquires the character of universal equivalent, 
because all other commodities make it the material in which 
they uniformly express their value. ||The first form, 20 yds. of linen =one coat, already contains 
this antagonism, without as yet fixing it. According as we read 
this equation forwards or backwards, the parts played by the 
linen and the coat are different. In the one case the relative 
value of the linen is expressed in the coat, in the other case the 
relative value of the coat is expressed in the linen. In this first 
form of value, therefore, it is difficult to grasp the polar contrast. ||Form B shows that only one single commodity at a time can 
completely expand its relative value, and that it acquires this 
expanded form only because, and in so far as, all other commodities 
are, with respect to it, equivalents. Here we cannot reverse the 
equation, as we can the equation 20 yds. of linen = 1 coat, 
without altering its general character, and converting it from 
the expanded form of value into the general form of value. ||Finally, the form C gives to the world of commodities a 
general social relative form of value, because, and in so far as, 
thereby all commodities, with the exception of one, are excluded 
from the equivalent form. A single commodity, the linen, appears 
therefore to have acquired the character of direct exchangeability 
with every other commodity because, and in so far as, this charac- 
ter is denied to every other commodity. L ||1 It is by no means self-evident that this character of direct and uni- 
versal exchangeability is, so to speak, a polar one, and as intimately con- 
nected with its opposite pole, the absence of direct exchangeability, as 
the positive pole of the magnet is with its negative counterpart. It may 
therefore be imagined that all commodities can simultaneously have this 
character impressed upon them, just as it can be imagined that all Catholics 
can be popes together. It is, of course, highly desirable in the eyes of the 
petit bourgeois, for whom the production of commodities is the nee plus ultra 
of human freedom and individual independence, that the inconveniences 
resulting from this character of commodities not being directly exchange- 
able, should be removed. Proudhon's socialism is a working out of this Philis- 
tine Utopia, a form of socialism which, as I have elsewhere shown, does not 
possess even the merit of originality. Long before his time, the task was at- 
tempted with much better success by Gray, Bray, and others. But, for all 
that, wisdom of this kind flourishes even now in certain circles under the 
name of "science." Never has any school played more tricks with the word 
science, than that of Proudhon, for ||were, at the same time, to share in the relative form of value, 
it would have to serve as its own equivalent. We should then 
have 20 yds. of linen = 20 yds. of linen; this tautology expresses 
neither value, nor magnitude of value. In order to express the 
relative value of the universal equivalent, we must rather reverse 
the form G. This equivalent has no relative form of value in com- 
mon with other commodities, but its value is relatively expressed 
by a never ending series of other commodities. Thus, the ex- 
panded form of relative value, or form B, now shows itself as the 
specific form of relative value for the equivalent commodity. ||The universal equivalent form is a form of value in general. 
It can, therefore, be assumed by any commodity. On the other 
hand, if a commodity be found to have assumed the univer- 
sal equivalent form (form G), this is only because and in so far 
as it has been excluded from the rest of all other commodities 
as their equivalent, and that by their own act. And from the mo- 
ment that this exclusion becomes finally restricted to one particu- 
lar commodity, from that moment only, the general form of rel- 
ative value of the world of commodities obtains real consistence 
and general social validity. ||The particular commodity, with whose bodily form the equiv- 
alent form is thus socially identified, now becomes the money- 
commodity, or serves as money. It becomes the special social 
function of that commodity, and consequently its social monop- 
oly, to play within the world of commodities the part of the uni- 
versal equivalent. Amongst the commodities which, in form B, 
figure as particular equivalents of the linen, and, in form C, ex- 
press in common their relative values in linen, this foremost place 
has been attained by one in particular— namely, gold. If, then, 
in form G we replace the linen by gold, we get, ||In passing from form A to form B, and from the latter to 
form C, the changes are fundamental. On the other hand, there 
is no difference between forms G and D, except that, in the latter, 
gold has assumed the equivalent form in the place of linen. Gold 
is in form D, what linen was in form C — the universal equiva- 
lent. The progress consists in this alone, that the character of 
direct and universal exchangeability— in other words, that 
the universal equivalent form — has now, by social custom, be- 
come finally identified with the substance, gold. ||Gold is now money with reference to all other commodities 
only because it was previously, with reference to them, a simple 
commodity. Like all other commodities, it was also capable of 
serving as an equivalent, either as simple equivalent in isolated 
exchanges, or as particular equivalent by the side of others. 
Gradually it began to serve, within varying limits, as universal 
equivalent. So soon as it monopolises this position in the expres- 
sion of value for the world of commodities, it becomes the money 
commodity, and then, and not till then, does form D become dis- 
tinct from form C, and the general form of value become changed 
into the money-form. ||The difficulty in forming a concept of the money-form, con- 
sists in clearly comprehending the universal equivalent form, 
and as a necessary corollary, the general form of value, form G. 
The latter is deducible from form B, the expanded form of value, 
the essential component element of which, we saw, is form A, 
20 yards of linen =1 coat or x commodity A =y commodity B. 
The simple commodity-form is therefore the germ of the money- 
form. ||A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and 
easily understood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a 
very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and 
theological niceties. So far as it is a value in use, there is nothing 
mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the point of 
view that by its properties it is capable of satisfying human wants, 
or from the point that those properties are the product of human 
labour. It is as clear as noon-day, that man, by his industry, 
changes the forms of the materials furnished by Nature, in such 
a way as to make them useful to him. The form of wood, for 
instance, is altered, by making a table out of it. Yet, for all that, 
the table continues to be that common, every-day thing, wood. 
But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity, it is changed into 
something transcendent. It not only stands with its feet on the 
ground, but, in relation to all other commodities, it stands on 
its head, and evolves out of its wooden brain grotesque ideas, 
far more wonderful than "table-turning" ever was. ||The mystical character of commodities does not originate, 
therefore, in their use-value. Just as little does it proceed from 
the nature of the determining factors of value. For, in the first 
place, however varied the useful kinds of labour, or productive 
activities, may be, it is a physiological fact, that they are func- 
tions of the human organism, and that each such function, what- 
ever may be its nature or form, is essentially the expenditure of 
human brain, nerves, muscles, &c. Secondly, with regard to that 
which forms the ground-work for the quantitative determination 
of value, namely, the duration of that expenditure, or the quantity 
of labour, it is quite clear that there is a palpable difference 
between its quantity and quality. In all states of society, the 
labour-time that it costs to produce the means of subsistence, 
must necessarily be an object of interest to mankind, though not 
of equal interest in different stages of development. 1 And lastly, 
from the moment that men in any way work for one another, their 
labour assumes a social form. ||from this form itself. The equality of all sorts of human labour 
is expressed objectively by their products all being equally val- 
ues; the measure of the expenditure of labour-power by the du- 
ration of that expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value 
of the products of labour; and finally, the mutual relations of 
the producers, within which the social character of their labour 
affirms itself, take the form of a social relation between the prod- 
ucts. ||A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because 
in it the social character of men's labour appears to them as an 
objective character stamped upon the product of that labour: 
because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their 
own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing 
not between themselves, but between the products of their labour. 
This is the reason why the products of labour become commodities, 
social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible and 
imperceptible by the senses. In the same way the light from an 
object is perceived by us not as the subjective excitation of our 
optic nerve, but as the objective form of something outside the 
eye itself. But, in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an actual 
passage of light from one thing to another, from the external 
object to the eye. There is a physical relation between physical 
things. But it is different with commodities. There, the existence 
of the things qua commodities, and the value-relation between 
the products of labour which stamps them as commodities, have 
absolutely no connexion with their physical properties and with 
the material relations arising therefrom. There it is a definite 
social relation between men, that assumes, in their eyes, the 
fantastic form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, 
to find an analogy, we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped 
regions of the religious world. In that world the productions of 
the human brain appear as independent beings endowed with 
life, and entering into relation both with one another and the 
human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products 
of men's hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself 
to the products of labour, so soon as they are produced as commod- 
ities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of 
commodities. ||or groups of individuals who carry on their work independently 
of each other. The sum total of the labour of all these private in- 
dividuals forms the aggregate labour of society. Since the producers' 
do not come into social contact with each other until they exchange 
their products, the specific social character of each producer's 
labour does not show itself except in the act of exchange. In other 
words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the 
labour of society, only by means of the relations which the act of 
exchange establishes directly between the products, and indirect- 
ly, through them, between the producers. To the latter, there- 
fore, the relations connecting the labour of one individual with 
that of the rest appear, not as direct social relations between 
individuals at work, but as what they really are, material rela- 
tions between persons and social relations between things. It is 
only by being exchanged that the products of labour acquire, 
as values, one uniform social status, distinct from their varied 
forms of existence as objects of utility. This division of a prod- 
uct into a useful thing and a value becomes practically important, 
only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful 
articles are produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and 
their character as values has therefore to be taken into account, 
beforehand, during production. From this moment the labour 
of the individual producer acquires socially a two-fold character. 
On the one hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of labour, 
satisfy a definite social want, and thus hold its place as part 
and parcel of the collective labour of all, as a branch of a social 
division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously. On the 
other hand, it can satisfy the manifold wants of the individual 
producer himself, only in so far as the mutual exchangeability 
of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social fact, 
and therefore the private useful labour of each producer ranks 
on an equality with that of all others. The equalisation of the 
most different kinds of labour can be the result only of an abstrac- 
tion from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their common 
denominator, viz., expenditure of human labour-power or human 
labour in the abstract. The two-fold social character of the la- 
bour of the individual appears to him, when reflected in his brain, 
only under those forms which are impressed upon that labour in 
every-day practice by the exchange of products. In this way, the 
character that his own labour possesses of being socially useful 
takes the form of the condition, that the product must be not 
only useful, but useful for others, and the social character that 
his particular labour has of being the equal of all other particular ||Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into rela- 
tion with each other as values, it is not because we see in these 
articles the material receptacles of homogeneous human labour. 
Quite the contrary: whenever, by an exchange, we equate as 
values our different products, by that very act, we also equate, 
as human labour, the different kinds of labour expended upon 
them. We are not aware of this, nevertheless we do it. 1 Value, 
therefore, does not stalk about with a label describing what it is. 
It is value, rather, that converts every product into a social hiero- 
glyphic. Later on, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind 
the secret of our own social products; for to stamp an object of 
utility as a value, is just as much a social product as language. 
The recent scientific discovery, that the products of labour, so 
far as they are values, are but material expressions of the human 
labour spent in their production, marks, indeed, an epoch in the 
history of the development of the human race, but, by no means, 
dissipates the mist through which the social character of labour 
appears to us to be an objective character of the products them- 
selves. The fact, that in the particular form of production with 
which we are dealing, viz., the production of commodities, the spe- 
cific social character of private labour carried on independently, 
consists in the equality of every kind of that labour, by virtue 
of its being human labour, which character, therefore, assumes 
in the product the form of value — this fact appears to the produc- 
ers, notwithstanding the discovery above referred to, to be just 
as real and final, as the fact, that, after the discovery by science 
of the component gases of air, the atmosphere itself remained 
unaltered. ||What, first of all, practically concerns producers when they 
make an exchange, is the question, how much of some other 
product they get for their own? in what proportions the products 
are exchangeable? When these proportions have, by custom, at- 
tained a certain stability, they appear to result from the nature of 
the products, so that, for instance, one ton of iron and two ounces 
of gold appear as naturally to be of equal value as a pound of ||gold and a pound of iron in spite of their different physical and 
chemical qualities appear to be of equal weight. The character of 
having value, when once impressed upon products, obtains fixity- 
only by reason of their acting and re-acting upon each other as 
quantities of value. These quantities vary continually, independ- 
ently of the will, foresight and action of the producers. To 
them, their own social action takes the form of tjie action of objects, 
which rule the producers instead of being ruled by them. It re- 
quires a fully developed production of commodities before, from 
accumulated experience alone, the scientific conviction springs up, 
that all the different kinds of private labour, which are carried 
on independently of each other, and yet as spontaneously devel- 
oped branches of the social division of labour, are continually 
being reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society 
requires them. And why? Because, in the midst of all the acci- 
dental and ever fluctuating exchange-relations between the prod- 
ucts, the labour-time socially necessary for their production 
forcibly asserts itself like an over-riding law of Nature. The law 
of gravity thus asserts itself when a house falls about our ears. 1 
The determination of the magnitude of value by labour-time is 
therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent fluctuations in the 
relative values of commodities. Its discovery, while removing 
all appearance of mere accidentality from the determination of 
the magnitude of the values of products, yet in no way alters the 
mode in which that determination takes place. ||Man's reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently, 
also, his scientific analysis of those forms, take a course directly 
opposite to that of their actual historical development. He begins, 
post festum, with the results of the process of development 
ready to hand before him. The characters that stamp products 
as commodities, and whose establishment is a necessary pre- 
liminary to the circulation of commodities, have already acquired 
the stability of natural, self-understood forms of social life, 
before man seeks to decipher, not their historical character, for 
in his eyes they are immutable, but their meaning. Consequently 
it was the analysis of the prices of commodities that alone led 
to the determination of the magnitude of value, and it was the 
common expression of all commodities in money that alone led ||to the establishment of their characters as values. It is, however, 
just this ultimate money-form of the world of commodities that 
actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the social character of 
private labour, and the social relations between the individual 
producers. When I state that coats or boots stand in a relation 
to linen, because it is the universal incarnation of abstract human 
labour, the absurdity of the statement is self-evident. Nevertheless, 
when the producers of coats and boots compare those articles with 
linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver, as the uni- 
versal equivalent, they express the relation between their own 
private labour and the collective labour of society in the same 
absurd form. ||The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like 
forms. They are forms of thought expressing with social validity 
the conditions and relations of a definite, historically determined 
mode of production, viz., the production of commodities. The 
whole mystery of commodities, all the magic and necromancy 
that surrounds the products of labour as long as they take the 
form of commodities, vanishes therefore, so soon as we come to 
other forms of production. ||Since Robinson Crusoe's experiences are a favourite theme 
with political economists, * let us take a look at him on his island. 
Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he has to satisfy, and 
must therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as 
making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing and hunting. 
Of his prayers and the like we take no account, since they are a 
source of pleasure to him, and he looks upon them as so much 
recreation. In spite of the variety of his work, he knows that his 
labour, whatever its form, is but the activity of one and the 
same Robinson, and consequently, that it consists of nothing but 
different modes of human labour. Necessity itself compels him 
to apportion his time accurately between his different kinds of 
work. Whether one kind occupies a greater space in his general 
activity than another, depends on the difficulties, greater or less 
as the case may be, to be overcome in attaining the useful effect ||1 Even Ricardo has his stories a la Robinson. "He makes the primitive 
hunter and the primitive fizher straightway, as owners of commodities, ex- 
change fish and game in the proportion in which labour-time is incorporated 
in these exchange-values. On this occasion he commits the anachronism of 
making these men apply to the calculation, so far as their implements have 
to be taken into account, the annuity tables in current use on the London 
Exchange in the year 1817. 'The parallelograms of Mr. Owen' appear to be 
the only form of society, besides the bourgeois form, with which he was ac- 
quainted." (Karl Marx: "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 38, 39.) ||aimed at. This our friend Robinson soon learns by experience, 
and having rescued a watch, ledger, and pen and ink from the 
wreck, commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of books. 
His stock-book contains a list of the objects of utility that belong 
to him, of the operations necessary for their production; and last- 
ly, of the labour-time that definite quantities of those objects 
have, on an average, cost him. All the relations between Robinson 
and the objects that form this wealth of his own creation, are 
here so simple and clear as to be intelligible without exertion, 
even to Mr. Sedley Taylor. And yet those relations contain all 
that is essential to the determination of value. ||Let us now transport ourselves from Robinson's island bathed 
in light to the European middle ages shrouded in darkness. Here, 
instead of the independent man, we find everyone dependent, serfs 
and lords, vassals and suzerains, laymen and clergy. Personal 
dependence here characterises the social relations of production 
just as much as it does the other spheres of life organised on the 
basis of that production. But for the very reason that personal 
dependence forms the ground-work of society, there is no necessity 
for labour and its products to assume a fantastic form different 
from their reality. They take the shape, in the transactions of 
society, of services in kind and payments in kind. Here the par- 
ticular and natural form of labour, and not, as in a society based 
on production of commodities, its general abstract form is the 
immediate social form of labour. Compulsory labour is just as 
properly measured by time, as commodity-producing labour; 
but every serf knows that what he expends in the service of his 
lord, is a definite quantity of his own personal labour-power. 
The tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than 
his blessing. No matter, then, what we may think of the parts 
played by the different classes of people themselves in this soci- 
ety, the social relations between individuals in the performance 
of their labour, appear at all events as their own mutual personal 
relations, and are not disguised under the shape of social relations 
between the products of labour. ||chal industries of a peasant family, that produces corn, cattle, 
yarn, linen, and clothing for home use. These different articles 
are, as regards the family, so many products of its labour, but as 
between themselves, they are not commodities. The different kinds 
of labour, such as tillage, cattle tending, spinning, weaving and 
making clothes, which result in the various products, are in them- 
selves, and such as they are, direct social functions, because func- 
tions of the family, which, just as much as a society based on 
the production of commodities, possesses a spontaneously devel- 
oped system of division of labour. The distribution of the work 
within the family, and the regulation of the labour-time of the 
several members, depend as well upon differences of age and sex 
as upon natural conditions varying with the seasons. The labour- 
power of each individual, by its very nature, operates in this case 
merely as a definite portion of the whole labour-power of the fam- 
ily, and therefore, the measure of the expenditure of individual 
labour-power by its duration, appears here by its very nature as a 
social character of their labour. ||Let us now picture to ourselves, by way of change, a commu- 
nity of free individuals, earning on their work with the means 
of production in common, in which the labour-power of all the 
different individuals is consciously applied as the combined la- 
bour-power of the community. All the characteristics of Robin- 
son's labour are here repeated, but with this difference, that they 
are social, instead of individual. Everything produced by him 
was exclusively the result of his own personal labour, and therefore 
simply an object of use for himself. The total product of our 
community is a social product. One portion serves as fresh means 
of production and remains social. But another portion is consumed 
by the members as means of subsistence. A distribution of this 
portion amongst them is consequently necessary. The mode of this 
distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the 
community, and the degree of historical development attained by 
the producers. We will assume, but merely for the sake of a paral- 
lel with the production of commodities, that the share of each 
individual producer in the means of subsistence is determined ||examples, ruins though they be, in India. A more exhaustive study of Asiatic, 
and especially of Indian forms of common property, would show how from 
the different forms of primitive common property, different forms of its 
dissolution have been developed. Thus, for instance, the various original 
types of Roman and Teutonic private property are deducible from differ- 
ent forms of Indian common property." (Karl Marx, "Zur Kritik, &c," 
P- 10.) ||by his labour-time. Labour-time would, in that case, play a double 
part. Its apportionment in accordance with a definite social plan 
maintains the proper proportion between the different kinds of 
work to be done and the various wants of the community. On the 
other hand, it also serves as a measure of the portion of the common 
labour borne by each individual, and of his share in the part of 
the total product destined for individual consumption. The social 
relations of the individual producers, with regard both to their 
labour and to its products, are in this case perfectly simple and 
intelligible, and that with regard not only to production but 
also to distribution. ||The religious world is but the reflex of the real world. And 
for a society based upon the production of commodities, in 
which the producers in general enter into social relations with 
one another by treating their products as commodities and values, 
whereby they reduce their individual private labour to the stand- 
ard of homogeneous human labour — for such a society, Chris- 
tianity with its cultus of abstract man, more especially in its 
bourgeois developments, Protestantism, Deism, &c, is the most 
fitting form of religion. In the ancient Asiatic and other ancient 
modes of production, we find that the conversion of products 
into commodities, and therefore the conversion of men into pro- 
ducers of commodities, holds a subordinate place, which, however, 
increases in importance as the primitive communities approach 
nearer and nearer to their dissolution. Trading nations, properly 
so called, exist in the ancient world only in its interstices, like 
the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews in the pores 
of Polish society. Those ancient social organisms of production 
are, as compared with bourgeois society, extremely simple and 
transparent. But they are founded either on the immature devel- 
opment of man individually, who has not yet severed the um- 
bilical cord that unites him with his fellowmen in a primitive 
tribal community, or upon direct relations of subjection. They can 
arise and exist only when the development of the productive 
power of labour has not risen beyond a low stage, and when, 
therefore, the social relations within the sphere of material life, 
between man and man, and between man and Nature, are corre- 
spondingly narrow. This narrowness is reflected in the ancient 
worship of Nature, and in the other elements of the popular reli- 
gions. The religious reflex of the real world can, in any case, only 
then finally vanish, when the practical relations of every-day life 
offer to man none but perfectly intelligible and reasonable rela- 
tions with regard to his fellowmen and to Nature, ||The life-process of society, which is based on the process of 
material production, does not strip off its mystical veil until it 
is treated as production by freely associated men, and is con- 
sciously regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan. This, 
however, demands for society a certain material ground-work or 
set of conditions of existence which in their turn are the sponta- 
neous product of a long and painful process of development. ||1 The insufficiency of Ricardo's analysis of the magnitude of value, 
and his analysis is by far the best, will appear from the 3rd and 4th books 
of this work. As regards value in general, it is the weak point of the classi- 
cal school of Political Economy that it nowhere, expressly and with full 
consciousness, distinguishes between labour, as it appears in the value of 
a product and the same labour, as it appears in the use-value of that prod- 
uct. Of course the distinction is practically made, since this school treats 
labour, at one time under its quantitative aspect, at another under its qual- 
itative aspect. But it has not the least idea, that when the difference between 
various kinds of labour is treated as purely quantitative, their qualitative 
unity or equality, and therefore their reduction to abstract human labour, 
is implied. For instance, Ricardo declares that he agrees with Destutt de 
Tracy in this proposition: "As it is certain that our physical and moral facul- 
ties are alone our original riches, the employment of those faculties, labour 
of some kind, is our only original treasure, and it is always from this employ- 
ment that all those things are created, which we call riches.... It is certain, 
too, that all those things only represent the labour which has created them, 
and if they have a value, or even two distinct values, they can only derive 
them from that (the value) of the labour from which they emanate." (Ricar- 
do. "The Principles of Pol. Econ.," 3 Ed. Lond. 1821, p. 334.) We would here 
only point out, that Ricardo puts his own more profound interpretation 
upon the words of Destutt. What the latter really says is, that on the one 
hand all things which constitute wealth represent the labour that creates 
them, but that on the other hand, they acquire their "two different values" 
(use-value and exchange-value) from "the value of labour." He thus falls 
into the commonplace error of the vulgar economists, who assume the value 
of one commodity (in this case labour) in order to determine the values of 
the rest. But Ricardo reads him as if he had said, that labour (not the value 
of labour) is embodied both in use-value and exchange-value. Nevertheless, 
Ricardo himself pays so little attention to the two-fold character of the la- 
bour which has a two-fold embodiment, that he devotes the whole of his 
chapter on "Value and Riches, Their Distinctive Properties," to a laborious 
examination of the trivialities of a J. B. Say. And at the finish he is quite 
astonished to find that Destutt on the one hand agrees with him as to labour 
being the source of value, and on the other hand with J. B. Say as to the no- 
tion of value. ||bear it stamped upon them in unmistakeable letters that they 
belong to a state of society, in which the process of production 
has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by him, 
such formulae appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a 
self-evident necessity imposed by Nature as productive labour 
itself. Hence forms of social production that preceded the bourgeois 
form, are treated by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as the 
Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian religions. 1 ||their value, in discovering that form under which value becomes exchange- 
value. Even Adam Smith and Ricardo, the best representatives of the school, 
treat the form of value as a thing of no importance, as having no connexion 
with the inherent nature of commodities. The reason for this is not solely 
because their attention is entirely absorbed in the analysis of the magnitude 
of value. It lies deeper. The value-form of the product of labour is not only 
the most abstract, but is also the most universal form, taken by the product 
in bourgeois production, and stamps that production as a particular species 
of social production, and thereby gives it its special historical character. 
If then we treat this mode of production as one eternally fixed by Nature 
for every state of society, we necessarily overlook that which is the differ- 
entia specifica of the value-form, and consequently of the commodity-form, 
and of its further developments, money-form, capital-form, &c. We conse- 
quently find that economists, who are thoroughly agreed as to labour-time 
being the measure of the magnitude of value, have the most strange and 
contradictory ideas of money, the perfected form of the general equivalent. 
This is seen in a striking manner when they treat of banking, where the com- 
monplace definitions of money will no longer hold water. This led to the rise 
of a restored mercantile system (Ganilh, &c), which sees in value nothing 
but a social form, or rather the unsubstantial ghost of that form. Once for 
all I may here state, that by classical Political Economy, I understand that 
economy 'which, since the time of W. Petty, has investigated the real rela- 
tions of production in bourgeois society, in contradistinction to vulgar econ- 
omy, which deals with appearances only, ruminates without ceasing on the 
materials long since provided by scientific economy, and there seeks plausible 
explanations of the most obtrusive phenomena, for bourgeois daily use, but 
for the rest, confines itself to systematising in a pedantic way, and proclaiming 
for everlasting truths, the trite ideas held by the self-complacent bourgeoisie 
with regard to their own world, to them the best of all possible worlds. ||1 "Les economistes ont une singuliere maniere de proc6der. II n'y a pour 
eux que deux sortes d'institutions, celles de l'art et celles de la nature. Les 
institutions de la feodalite sont des institutions artificielles, celles de la bour- 
geoisie sont des institutions naturelles. lis ressemblent en ceci aux theologiens, 
qui eux aussi etablissent deux sortes de religions. Toute religion qui n'est pas 
la leur, est une invention des hommes, tandis que leur propre religion est une 
emanation de Dieu — Ainsi il y a eu de l'histoire, mais il n'y en a plus." (Karl 
Marx. Misere de la Philosophie. Reponse a la Philosophic de la Misere par 
M. Proudhon, 1847, p. 113.) Truly comical is M. Bastiat, who imagines that 
the ancient Greeks and Romans lived by plunder alone. But when people plun- 
der for centuries, there must always be something at hand fof them to seize, 
the objects of plunder must be continually reproduced. It would thus appear 
that even Greeks and Romans had some process of production, consequently, ||To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism 
inherent in commodities, or by the objective appearance of the 
social characteristics of labour, is shown, amongst other ways, 
by the dull and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature 
in the formation of exchange-value. Since exchange-value is a 
definite social manner of expressing the amount of labour be- 
stowed upon an object, Nature has no more to do with it, than 
it has in fixing the course of exchange. ||The mode of production in which the product takes the 
form of a commodity, or is produced directly for exchange, is the 
most general and most embryonic form of bourgeois production. 
It therefore makes its appearance at an early date in history, 
though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner 
as now-a-days. Hence its Fetish character is comparatively easy 
to be seen through. But when we come to more concrete forms, 
even this appearance of simplicity vanishes. Whence arose the illu- 
sions of the monetary system? To it gold and silver, when serving 
as money, did not represent a social relation between producers, 
but were natural objects with strange social properties. And modern 
economy, which looks down with such disdain on the monetary ||an economy, which just as much constituted the material basis of their world, 
as bourgeois economy constitutes that of our modern world. Or perhaps 
Bastiat means, that a mode of production based on slavery is based on a 
system of plunder. In that case he treads on dangerous ground. If a giant 
thinker like Aristotle erred in his appreciation of slave labour, why should 
a dwarf economist like Bastiat he right in his appreciation of wage-labour? — 
I seize this opportunity of shortly answering an objection taken by a German 
paper in America, to my work, "Zur Kritik der Pol. Oekonomie, 1859." In 
the estimation of that paper, my view that each special mode of production 
and the social relations corresponding to it, in short, that the economic 
structure of society, is the real basis on which the juridical and political 
superstructure is raised, and to which definite social forms of thought cor- 
respond; that the mode of production determines the character of the 
social, political, and intellectual life generally, all this is very true for our 
own times, in which material interests preponderate, but not for the middle 
ages, in which Catholicism, nor for Athens and Rome, where politics, reigned 
supreme. In the first place it strikes one as an odd thing for any one to 
suppose that these well-worn phrases about the middle ages and the an- 
cient world are unknown to anyone else. This much, however, is clear, 
that the middle ages could not live on Catholicism, nor the ancient world 
on politics. On the contrary, it is the mode in which they gained a livelihood 
that explains why here politics, and there Catholicism, played the chief 
part. For the rest, it requires but a slight acquaintance with the history of 
the Roman republic, for example, to be aware that its secret history is the 
history of its landed property. On the other hand, Don Quixote long ago paid 
the penalty for wrongly imagining that knight errantry was compatible 
with all economic forms of society. ||But not to anticipate, we will content ourselves with yet 
another example relating to the commodity-form. Gould com- 
modities themselves speak, they would say: Our use-value may 
be a thing that interests men. It is no part of us as objects. What, 
however, does belong to us as objects, is our value. Our natural 
intercourse as commodities proves it. In the eyes of each other 
we are nothing but exchange-values. Now listen how those com- 
modities speak through the mouth of the economist. "Value"— (i.e., 
exchange-value) "is a property of things, riches"— (i.e., 
use-value) "of man. Value, in this sense, necessarily implies 
exchanges, riches do not." * "Riches" (use-value) "are the attribute 
of men, value is the attribute of commodities. A man or a commu- 
nity is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable... A pearl or a dia- 
mond is valuable" as a pearl or diamond. 2 So far no chemist 
has ever discovered exchange-value either in a pearl or a diamond. 
The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who by-the- 
by lay special claim to critical acumen, find however that the 
use-value of objects belongs to them independently of their mate- 
rial properties, while their value, on the other hand, forms a 
part of them as objects. What confirms them in this view, is the 
peculiar circumstance that the use-value of objects is realised 
without exchange, by means of a direct relation between the 
objects and man, while, on the other hand, their value is real- 
ised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social process. 
W T ho fails here to call to mind our good friend, Dogberry, who 
informs neighbour Seacoal, that, "To be a well-favoured man 
is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by Nature." 3 ||3 Tbe author of "Observations" and S. Bailey accuse Ricardo of con- 
verting exchange-value from something relative into something absolute. The 
opposite is the fact. He has explained the apparent relation between objects, 
such as diamonds and pearls, in which relation they appear as exchange-val- 
ues, and disclosed the true relation hidden behind the appearances, namely, 
their relation to each other as mere expressions of human labour. If the fol- 
lowers of Ricardo answer Bailey somewhat rudely, and by no means convinc- 
ingly, the reason is to be sought in this, that they were unable to find in 
Ricardo's own works any key to the hidden relations existing between value 
and its form, exchange-value. ||It is plain that commodities cannot go to market and make 
exchanges of their own account. We must, therefore, have recourse 
to their guardians, who are also their owners. Commodities are 
things, and therefore without power of resistance against man. 
If they are wanting in docility he can use force; in other 
words, he can take possession of them. 1 In order that these objects 
may enter into relation with each other as commodities, their 
guardians must place themselves in relation to one another, as 
persons whose will resides in those objects, and must behave in 
such a way that each does not appropriate the commodity of the 
other, and part with his own, except by means of an act done by 
mutual consent. They must, therefore, mutually recognise in each 
other the rights of private proprietors. This juridical relation, 
which thus expresses itself in a contract, whether such contract 
be part of a developed legal system or not, is a relation between 
two wills, and is but the reflex of the real economic relation 
between the two. It is this economic relation that determines 
the subject-matter comprised in each such juridical act. 2 The ||2 Proudhon begins by taking his ideal of justice, of "justice eternelle," 
from the juridical relations that correspond to the production of commodi- 
ties: thereby, it may be noted, he proves, to the consolation of all good citi- 
zens, that the production of commodities is a form of production as everlasting 
as justice. Then he turns round and seeks to reform the actual production of 
commodities, and the actual legal system corresponding thereto, in accordance 
with this ideal. What opinion should we have of a chemist, who, instead 
of studying the actual laws of the molecular changes inthe composition and 
decomposition of matter, and on that foundation solving definite problems, ||What chiefly distinguishes a commodity from its owner is the 
fact, that it looks upon every other commodity as but the form 
of appearance of its own value. A born leveller and a cynic, it is 
always ready to exchange not only soul, but body, with any and 
every other commodity, be the same more repulsive than Maritor- 
nes herself. The owner makes up for this lack in the commodity 
of a sense of the concrete, by his own five and more senses. His 
commodity possesses for himself no immediate use-value. Other- 
wise, he would not bring it to the market. It has use-value for 
others; but for himself its only direct use-value is that of being a 
depository of exchange-value, and, consequently, a means of 
exchange. 1 Therefore, he makes up his mind to part with it for com- 
modities whose value in use is of service to him. All commodities 
are non-use-values for their owners, and use-values for their non- 
owners. Consequently, they must all change hands. But this change 
of hands is what constitutes their exchange, and the latter puts 
them in relation with each other as values, and realises them as 
values. Hence commodities must be realised as values before they 
can be realised as use-values. ||On the other hand, they must show that they are use-values 
before they can be realised as values. For the labour spent upon 
them counts effectively, only in so far as it is spent in a form that 
is useful for others. Whether that labour is useful for others, 
and its product consequently capable of satisfying the wants of 
others, can be proved only by the act of exchange. ||claimed to regulate the composition and decomposition ol matter by means of 
the "eternal ideas," of "naturalite" and "aft'inite"? Do we really know any 
more about "usury," when we say it contradicts "justice eternelle," "equite 
eternelle," "mutuality eternelle," and other "verites eternelles" than the fa- 
thers of the church did when they said it was incompatible with "grace eter- 
nelle," "foi eternelle," and "la volonte eternelle de Dieu"? ||1 "For two-fold is the use of every object.... The one is peculiar to the 
object as such, the other is not, as a sandal which may be worn, and is also 
exchangeable. Both are uses of the sandal, for even he who exchanges the 
sandal for the money or food he is in want of, makes use of the sandal as 
a sandal. But not in its natural way. For it has not been made for the sake 
of being exchanged." (Aristoteles, "De Rep.," 1. i. c. 9.) ||of his. Looked at in this way, exchange is for him simply a private 
transaction. On the other hand, he desires to realise the value of 
his commodity, to convert it into any other suitable commodity 
of equal value, irrespective of whether his own commodity has 
or has not any use-value for the owner of the other. From this 
point of view, exchange is for him a social transaction of a 
general character. But one and the same set of transactions cannot 
be simultaneously for all owners of commodities both exclu- 
sively private and exclusively social and general. ||Let us look at the matter a little closer. To the owner of a 
commodity, every other commodity is, in regard to his own, a 
particular equivalent, and consequently his own commodity is 
the universal equivalent for all the others. But since this applies 
to every owner, there is, in fact, no commodity acting as uni- 
versal equivalent, and the relative value of commodities possesses 
no general form under which they can be equated as values and 
have the magnitude of their values compared. So far, therefore, 
they do not confront each other as commodities, but only as 
products or use-values. In their difficulties our commodity- 
owners think like Faust: "Im Anfang war die That." They 
therefore acted and transacted before they thought. Instinctively 
they conform to the laws imposed by the nature of commodities. 
They cannot bring their commodities into relation as values, 
and therefore as commodities, except by comparing them with 
some one other commodity as the universal equivalent. That 
we saw from the analysis of a commodity. But a particular com- 
modity cannot become the universal equivalent except by a social 
act. The social action therefore of all other commodities, sets 
apart the particular commodity in which they all represent their 
values. Thereby the bodily form of this commodity becomes the 
form of the socially recognised universal equivalent. To be the 
universal equivalent, becomes, by this social process, the specific 
function of the commodity thus excluded by the rest. Thus it 
becomes — money. "Illi unum consilium habent et virtutem 
et potestatem suam bestise tradunt. Et ne quis possit emere aut 
vendere, nisi qui habet characterem aut nomen bestise, ^ut nume- 
rum nominis ejus." (Apocalypse.) ||Money is a crystal formed of necessity in the course of the 
exchanges, whereby different products of labour are practically 
equated to one another and thus by practice converted into com- 
modities. The historical progress and extension of exchanges de- 
velops the contrast, latent in commodities, between use-value and 
value. The necessity for giving an external expression to this ||contrast for the purposes of commercial intercourse, urges on 
the establishment of an independent form of value, and finds no 
rest until it is once for all satisfied by the differentiation of com- 
modities into commodities and money. At the same rate, then, 
as the conversion of products into commodities is being accom- 
plished, so also is the conversion of one special commodity into 
money. 1 ||The direct barter of products attains the elementary form 
of the relative expression of value in one respect, but not in an- 
other. That form is x Commodity A = y Commodity B. The form 
of direct barter is x use-value A= y use-value B. 2 The articles 
A and B in this case are not as yet commodities, but become so 
only by the act of barter. The first step made by an object of util- 
ity towards acquiring exchange-value is when it forms a non-use- 
value for its owner, and that happens when it forms a superfluous 
portion of some article required for his immediate wants. Objects 
in themselves are external to man, and consequently alienable 
by him. In order that this alienation may be reciprocal, it is 
only necessary for men, by a tacit understanding, to treat each 
other as private owners of those alienable objects, and by impli- 
cation as independent individuals. But such a state of reciprocal 
independence has no existence in a primitive society based on 
property in common, whether such a society takes the form of a 
patriarchal family, an ancient Indian community, or a Peruvian 
Inca State. The exchange of commodities, therefore, first begins 
on the boundaries of such communities, at their points of contact 
with other similar communities, or with members of the latter. 
So soon, however, as products once become commodities in the 
external relations of a community, they also, by reaction, become 
so in its internal intercourse. The proportions in which they are 
exchangeable are at first quite a matter of chance. What makes 
them exchangeable is the mutual desire of their owners to alie- 
nate them. Meantime the need for foreign objects of utility ||1 From this we may form an estimate of the shrewdness of the petit- 
bourgeois socialism, which, while perpetuating the production of commodi- 
ties, aims at abolishing the "antagonism" between money and commodities, 
and consequently, since money exists only by virtue of this antagonism, at 
abolishing money itself. We might just as well try to retain Catholicism with- 
out the Pope. For more on this point see my work "Zur Kritik der Pol. 
Oekon." ,p. 61, sq. ||gradually establishes itself. The constant repetition of exchange 
makes it a normal social act. In the course of time, therefore, some 
portion at least of the products of labour must be produced with 
a special view to exchange. From that moment the distinction 
becomes firmly established between the utility of an object for 
the purposes of consumption, and its utility for the purposes of ex- 
change. Its use-value becomes distinguished from its exchange- 
value. On the other hand, the quantitative proportion in which 
the articles are exchangeable, becomes dependent on their produc- 
tion itself. Custom stamps them as values with definite magni- 
tudes. ||In the direct barter of products, each commodity is directly 
a means of exchange to its owner, and to all other persons an 
equivalent, but that only in so far as it has use-value for them. 
At this stage, therefore, the articles exchanged do not acquire 
a value-form independent of their own use-value, or of the individ- 
ual needs of the exchangers. The necessity for a value-form grows 
with the increasing number and variety of the commodities ex- 
changed. The problem and the means of solution arise simultane- 
ously. Commodity-owners never equate their own commodities to 
those of others, and exchange them on a large scale, without differ- 
ent kinds of commodities belonging to different owners being ex- 
changeable for, and equated as values to, one and the same special 
article. Such last-mentioned article, by becoming the equivalent 
of various other commodities, acquires at once, though within 
narrow limits, the character of a general social equivalent. This 
character comes and goes with the momentary social acts that 
called it into life. In turns and transiently it attaches itself first 
to this and then to that commodity. But with the development of 
exchange it fixes itself firmly and exclusively to particular sorts 
of commodities, and becomes crystallised by assuming the money- 
form. The particular kind of commodity to which it sticks is at 
first a matter of accident. Nevertheless there are two circumstances 
whose influence is decisive. The money-form attaches itself either 
to the most important articles of exchange from outside, and these 
in fact are primitive and natural forms in which the exchange- 
value of home products finds expression; or else it attaches itself 
to the object of utility that forms, like cattle, the chief portion 
of indigenous alienable wealth. Nomad races are the first to 
develop the money-form, because all their worldly goods consist 
of moveable objects and are therefore directly alienable; and be- 
cause their mode of life, by continually bringing them into con- 
tact with foreign communities, solicits the exchange of products. ||Man has often made man himself, under the form of slaves, serve 
as the primitive material of money, but has never used land for 
that purpose. Such an idea could only spring up in a bourgeois 
society already well developed. It dates from the last third of 
the 17th century, and the first attempt to put it in practice 
on a national scale was made a century afterwards, during the 
French bourgeois revolution. ||In proportion as exchange bursts its local bonds, and the 
value of commodities more and more expands into an embodi- 
ment of human labour in the abstract, in the same proportion 
the character of money attaches itself to commodities that are 
by Nature fitted to perform the social function of a universal equiv- 
alent. Those commodities are the precious metals. ||The truth of the proposition that, "although gold and silver 
are not by Nature money, money is by Nature gold and silver," 1 
is shown by the fitness of the physical properties of these metals 
for the functions of money. 2 Up to this point, however, we are 
acquainted only with one function of money, namely, to serva 
as the form of manifestation of the value of commodities, or as 
the material in which the magnitudes of their values are socially 
expressed. An adequate form of manifestation of value, a fit 
embodiment of abstract, undifferentiated, and therefore equal 
human labour, that material alone can be whose every sample 
exhibits the same uniform qualities. On the other hand, since the 
difference between the magnitudes of value is purely quantitative, 
the money-commodity must be susceptible of merely quantita^ 
tive differences, must therefore be divisible at will, and equally 
capable of being re-united. Gold and silver possess these properties 
by Nature. ||We have seen that the money-form is but the reflex, thrown 
upon one single commodity, of the value relations between all 
the rest. That money is a commodity 1 is therefore a new discovery 
only for those who, when they analyse it, start from its fully de- 
veloped shape. The act of exchange gives to the commodity con- 
verted into money, not its value, but its specific value-form. 
By confounding these two distinct things some writers have 
been led to hold that the value of gold and silver is imaginary. 2 
The fact that money can, in certain functions, be replaced by mere 
symbols of itself, gave rise to that other mistaken notion, that 
it is itself a mere symbol. Nevertheless under this error lurked 
a presentiment that the money-form of an object is not an insep- 
arable part of that object, but is simply the form under which 
certain social relations manifest themselves. In this sense every 
commodity is a symbol, since, in so far as it is value, it is only 
the material envelope of the human labour spent upon it. 3 But if ||1 "Silver and gold themselves (which we may call by the general 
name of bullion) are ... commodities ... rising and falling in ... value... 
Bullion, then, may be reckoned to be of higher value where the smaller 
weight will purchase the greater quantity of the product or manufacture of 
the countrey," &c. ("A Discourse of the General Notions of Money, Trade, 
and Exchanges, as They Stand in Relation each to other." By a Merchant! 
Lond., 1695, p. 7.) "Silver and gold, coined or uncoined, though they are 
used for a measure of all other things, are no less a commodity than wine, 
oil, tobacco, cloth, or stuffs." ("A Discourse concerning Trade, and that in 
particular of the East Indies," &c. London, 1689, p. 2.) "The stock and riches 
of the kingdom cannot properly be confined to money, nor ought gold and 
silver to be excluded from being merchandise." ("The East-India Trade a 
Most Profitable Trade." London, 1677, p. 4.) ||2 "L'oro e l'argento hanno valore come metalli anteriore all'esser mo- 
neta." (Galiani, 1. c.) Locke says, "The universal consent of mankind erave 
to silver, on account of its qualities which made it suitable for money, an 
imaginary value." Law, on the other hand, "How could different nations 
give an imaginary value to any single thing... or how could this imaginary 
value have' maintained itself?" But the following shows how little he 
himself understood about the matter: "Silver was exchanged in proportion 
to the value in use it possessed, consequently in proportion to its real value. 
By its adoption as money it received an additional value (une valeur addi- 
tionnelle)". (Jean Law: "Considerations sur le numeraire et le commerce" 
in E. Daire's Edit, of "Economistes Financiers du XVIII. siecle ," p. 470.) ||3 "L'Argent en (des denrees) est le signe." (V. de Forbonnais: "Elements 
du Commerce, Nouv. Edit. Leyde, 1766," t. II., p. 143.) "Comme signe il 
est attire par les denrees." (1. c, p. 155.) "L'argent est un signe d'une 
chose et la represente." (Montesquieu: "Esprit des Lois," (CEuvres, Lond. 
1767, t. II, p. 2.) "L'argent n'est pas simple signe, car*il est lui-meme rich- 
esse; il ne represente pas les valeurs, il les equivaut." (Le Trosne, I. c, p. 
910.) "The notion of value contemplates the valuable article as a mere sym- ||it be declared that the social characters assumed by objects, or 
the material forms assumed by the social qualities of labour under 
the regime of a definite mode of production, are mere symbols, 
it is in the same breath also declared that these characteristics 
are arbitrary fictions sanctioned by the so-called universal consent 
of mankind. This suited the mode of explanation in favour during 
the 18th century. Unable to account for the origin of the puzzling 
forms assumed by social relations between man and man, people 
sought to denude them of their strange appearance by ascribing 
to them a conventional origin. ||It has already been remarked above that the equivalent form 
of a commodity does not imply the determination of the magni- 
tude of its value. Therefore, although we may be aware that gold 
is money, and consequently directly exchangeable for all other 
commodities, yet that fact by no means tells how much 10 lbs., 
for instance, of gold is worth. Money, like every other commodity, 
cannot express the magnitude of its value except relatively in 
other commodities. This value is determined by the labour-time 
required for its production, and is expressed by the quantity 
of any other commodity that costs the same amount of labour- 
time. 1 Such quantitative determination of its relative value takes ||bol; the article counts not for what it is, but for what it is worth." (Hegel, 
1. c, p. 100.) Lawyers started long before economists the idea that money 
is a mere symbol, and that the value of the precious metals is purely imagi- 
nary. This they did in the sycophantic service of the crowned heads, support- 
ing the right of the latter to debase the coinage, during the whole of the mid- 
dle ages, by the traditions of the Roman Empire and the conceptions of money 
to be found in the Pandects "Qu'aucun puisse ni doive faire doute," says an 
apt scholar of theirs, Philip of Valois, in a decree of 1346, "que a nous et a 
notre majeste royale n'appartiennent seulement ... le mestier, le fait, 
l'etat, la provision et toute l'ordonnance des monnaies, de donner tel cours, 
et pour tel prix comme il nous plait et bon nous semble." It was a maxim of 
the Roman Law that the value of money was fixed by decree of the emperor. 
It was expressly forbidden to treat money as a commodity. "Pecunias vero 
nulli einere fas erit, nam in usu publico constitutas oportet non esse mercem." 
Some good work on this question has been done by G. F. Pagnini: "Saggio 
sopra il giusto pregio delle cose, 1751"; Custodi "Parte Moderna," t. II. In 
the second part of his work Pagnini directs his polemics especially against 
the lawyers. ||1 "If a man can bring to London an ounce of Silver out of the Earth 
in Peru, in the same time that he can produce a bushelof Corn, then the one 
is the natural price of the other; now, if by reason of new or more easie 
mines a man can procure two ounces of silver as easily as he formerly did one, 
the corn will be as cheap at ten shillings the bushel as it was before at five 
shillings, ceteris paribus." William Petty. "A Treatise of Taxes and Contri- 
butions." Lond., 1667, p. 32. ||place at the source of its production by means of barter. When 
it steps into circulation as money, its value is already given. 
In the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown 
that money is a commodity, but this step marks only the infancy 
of the analysis. The difficulty lies, not in comprehending that 
money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why, and by what 
means a commodity becomes money. 1 ||We have already seen, from the most elementary expression 
of value, x commodity A=y commodity B, that the object in 
which the magnitude of the value of another object is represented, 
appears to have the equivalent form independently of this rela- 
tion, as a social property given to it by Nature. We followed up 
this false appearance to its final establishment, which is complete 
so soon as the universal equivalent form becomes identified with 
the bodily form of a particular commodity, and thus crystal- 
lised into the money-form. What appears to happen is, not that 
gold becomes money, in consequence of all other commodities 
expressing their values in it, but, on the contrary, that all other 
commodities universally express their values in gold, because it 
is money. The intermediate steps of the process vanish in the 
result and leave no trace behind. Commodities find their own value 
already completely represented, without any initiative on their 
part, in another commodity existing in company with them. These 
objects, gold and silver, just as they come out of the bowels of 
the earth, are forthwith the direct incarnation of all human 
labour. Hence the magic of money. In the form of society now under 
consideration, the behaviour of men in the social process of 
production is purely atomic. Hence their relations to each other ||1 The learned Professor Roscher, after first informing us that "the false 
definitions of money may be divided into two main groups: those which make 
it more, and those which make it less, than a commodity," gives us a long 
and very mixed catalogue of works on the nature of money, from which it 
appears that he has not the remotest idea of the real history of the theory; 
and then he moralises thus: "For the rest, it is not to be denied that most of 
the later economists do not bear sufficiently in mind the peculiarities that 
distinguish money from other commodities" (it is then, after all, either 
more or less than a commodity!)... "So far, the semi-mercantilist reaction 
of Ganilh is not altogether without foundation." (Wilhelm Roscher: "Die 
Grundlagen der Nationaloekonomie," 3rd Edn., 1858, pp. 207-210.) More! 
less! not sufficiently! so far! not altogether! What clearness and precision of 
ideas and language! And such eclectic professorial twaddle i is modestly 
baptised by Mr. Roscher, "the anatomico-physiological method!' of Political 
Economy! One discovery however, he must have credit for, Aamely, that 
money is "a pleasant commodity." ||in production assume a material character independent of their 
control and conscious individual action. These facts manifest 
themselves at first by products as a general rule taking the form 
of commodities. We have seen how the progressive development 
of a society of commodity-producers stamps one privileged com- 
modity with the character of money. Hence the riddle presented 
by money is but the riddle presented by commodities; only it 
now strikes us in its most glaring form. ||The first chief function of money is to supply commodities 
with the material for the expression of their values, or to 
represent their values as magnitudes of the same denomination, 
qualitatively equal, and quantitatively comparable. It thus 
serves as a universal measure of value. And only by virtue of this 
function does gold, the equivalent commodity par excellence, 
become money. ||It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. 
Just the contrary. It is because all commodities, as values, are 
realised human labour, and therefore commensurable, that their 
values can be measured by one and the same special commodity, 
and the latter be converted into the common measure of their 
values, i.e., into money. Money as a measure of value JL J_s the 
phenomenal form that must of necessity be assumed by that 
measure of value which is immanent in commodities, laboUr-fcrmeT^ ||1 The question — Why does not money directly represent labour-time, 
so that a piece of paper may represent, for instance, x hours' labour, is at 
bottom the same as the question why, given the production of commodities, 
must products take the form of commodities? This is evident, since their 
taking the form of commodities implies their differentiation into commodi- 
ties and money. Or, why cannot private labour — labour for the account of 
private individuals — be treated as its opposite, immediate social labour? 
I have elsewhere examined thoroughly the Utopian idea of "labour-money" 
in a society founded on the production of commodities (1. c, p. 61, seq.). 
On this point I will only say further, that Owen's "labour-money," for in- 
stance, is no more "money" than a ticket for the theatre. Owen pre-supposes 
directly associated labour, a form of production that -is entirely inconsist- 
ent with the production of commodities. The certificate of labour is merely 
evidence of the part taken by the individual in the common labour, and of ||The expression of the value of a commodity in gold— x 
commodity A=y money-commodity — is its money-form or 
price. A single equation, such as 1 ton of iron =2 ounces of gold, 
now suffices to express the value of the iron in a socially valid 
manner. There is no longer any need for this equation to figure 
as a link in the chain of equations that express the values of all 
other commodities, because the equivalent commodity, gold, 
now has the character of money. The general form of relative 
value has resumed its original shape of simple or isolated relative 
value. On the other hand, the expanded expression of relative 
value, the endless series of equations, has now become the form 
peculiar to the relative value of the money-commodity. The series 
itself, too, is now given, and has social recognition in the prices 
of actual commodities. We have only to read the quotations of 
a price-list backwards, to find the magnitude of the value of 
money expressed in all sorts of commodities. But money itself has 
no price. In order to put it on an equal footing with all other 
commodities in this respect, we should be obliged to equate it to 
itself as its own equivalent. ||The price or money-form of commodities is, like their form 
of value generally, a form quite distinct from their palpable bodily 
form; it is, therefore, a purely ideal or mental form. Although 
invisible, the value of iron, linen and corn has actual existence 
in these very articles: it is ideally made perceptible by their 
equality with gold, a relation that, so to say, exists only in their 
own heads. Their owner must, therefore, lend them his tongue, 
or hang a ticket on them, before their prices can be communi- 
cated to the outside world. 1 Since the expression of the value of 
commodities in gold is a merely ideal act, we may use for this 
purpose imaginary or ideal money. Every trader knows, that he ||1 Savages and half-civilised races use the tongue differently. Captain 
Parry says of the inhabitants on the west coast of Baffin's Bay: "In this 
case (he refers to barter) they licked it (the thing represented to them) twice 
to their tongues, after which they seemed to consider the bargain satisfac- 
torily concluded." In the same way, the Eastern Esquimaux licked the articles 
they received in exchange. If the tongue is thus used in the North as the 
organ of appropriation, no wonder that, in the South, the stomach serves 
as the organ of accumulated property, and that a Kaffir estimates the wealth 
of a man by the size of his belly. That the Kaffirs know what they are about 
is shown by the following: at the same time that the official British Health ||is far from having turned his goods into money, when he has ex- 
pressed their value in a price or in imaginary money, and that it 
does not require the least bit of real gold, to estimate in that 
metal millions of pounds' worth of goods. When, therefore, money 
serves as a measure of value, it is employed only as imaginary 
or ideal money. This circumstance has given rise to the wildest 
theories. 1 But, although the money that performs the functions 
of a measure of value is only ideal money, price depends entirely 
upon the actual substance that is money. The value, or in other 
words, the quantity of human labour contained in a ton of iron, 
is expressed in imagination by such a quantity of the money- 
commodity as contains the same amount of labour as the iron. 
According, therefore, as the measure of value is gold, silver, or 
copper, the value of the ton of iron will be expressed by very 
different prices, or will be represented by very different quantities 
of those metals respectively. ||If, therefore, two different commodities, such as gold and 
silver, are simultaneously measures of value, all commodities 
have two prices — one a gold-price, the other a silver-price. 
These exist quietly side by side, so long as the ratio of the value 
of silver to that of gold remains unchanged, say, at 15 : 1. Every 
change in their ratio disturbs the ratio which exists between the 
gold-prices and the silver-prices of commodities, and thus proves, 
by facts, that a double standard of value is inconsistent with the 
functions of a standard. 2 ||2 "Wherever gold and silver have by law been made to perform the 
function of money or of a measure of value side by side, it has always been 
tried, but in vain, to treat them as one and the same material. To assume 
that there is an invariable ratio between the quantities of gold and silver in 
which a given quantity of labour-time is incorporated, is to assume, in fact, 
that gold and silver are of one and the same material, and that a given mass 
of the less valuable metal, silver, is a constant fraction of a given mass of 
gold. From the reign of Edward III. to the time of George II., the history 
of money in England consists of one long series of perturbations caused by 
the clashing of the legally fixed ratio between the values of gold and silver, 
with the fluctuations in their real values. At one time gold was too high, 
at another, silver. The metal that for the time being was estimated below 
its value, was withdrawn from circulation, melted and exported. The ratio 
between the two metals was then again altered by law, but the new nominal ||Commodities with definite prices present themselves under 
the form: a commodity A=x gold; b commodity B =z gold; 
c commodity C=y gold, &c, where a, b, c, represent definite 
quantities of the commodities A, B, G and x, z, y, definite quan- 
tities of gold. The values of these commodities are, therefore, 
changed in imagination into so many different quantities of gold. 
Hence, in spite of the confusing variety of the commodities them- 
selves, their values become magnitudes of the same denomination, 
gold-magnitudes. They are now capable of being compared with 
each other and measured, and the want becomes technically felt 
of comparing them with some fixed quantity of gold as a unit 
measure. This unit, by subsequent division into aliquot parts, 
becomes itself the standard or scale. Before they become money, 
gold, silver, and copper already possess such standard measures 
in their standards of weight, so that, for example, a pound weight, 
while serving as the unit, is, on the one hand, divisible into ounces, 
and, on the other, may be combined to make up hundredweights. x 
It is owing to this that, in all metallic currencies, the names 
given to the standards of money or of price were originally taken 
from the pre-existing names of the standards of weight. ||ratio soon came into conflict again with the real one. In our own times, the 
slight and transient fall in the value of gold compared with silver, which 
was a consequence of the Indo-Chinese demand for silver, produced on a far 
more extended scale in France the same phenomena, export of silver, and its 
expulsion from circulation by gold. During the years 1855, 1856 and 1857, the 
excess in France of gold-imports over gold-exports amounted to £ 41 ,580,000, 
while the excess of silver-exports over silver-imports was £ 14,704,000. In 
fact, in those countries in which both metals are legally measures of value, 
and therefore both legal tender, so that everyone has the option of paying 
in either metal, the metal that rises in value is at a premium, and, like every 
other commodity, measures its price in the over-estimated metal which alone 
serves in reality as the standard of value. The result of all experience and 
history with regard to this question is simply that, where two commodities 
perform by law the functions of a measure of value, in practice one alone 
maintains that position." (Karl Marx, 1. c, pp. 52, 53.) ||1 The peculiar circumstance, that while the ounce of gold serves in 
England as the unit of the standard of money, the pound sterling does not 
form an aliquot part of it, has been explained as follows: "Our coinage was 
originally adapted to the employment of silver only, hence, an ounce oi sil- 
ver can always be divided into a certain adequate number of pieces oi coin; 
but as gold was introduced at a later period into a coinage adapted only to 
silver, an ounce of gold cannot be coined into an aliquot number of pieces 
Maclaren, "A Sketch of the History of the Currency." London, 1856, p. lb. ||labour- it is the standard of price inasmuch as it is a fixed weight 
of metal. As the measure of value it serves to convert the values 
of all the manifold commodities into prices, into imaginary quan- 
tities of gold; as the standard of price it measures those quanti- 
ties of gold. The measure of values measures commodities consid- 
ered as values; the standard of price measures, on the contrary, 
quantities of gold by a unit quantity of gold, not the value of 
one quantity of gold by the weight of another. In order to make 
gold a standard of price, a certain weight must be fixed upon as the 
unit. In this case, as in all cases of measuring quantities of the 
same denomination, the establishment of an unvarying unit of 
measure is all-important. Hence, the less the unit is subject to 
variation, so much the better does the standard of price fulfil its 
office. But only in so far as it is itself a product of labour, and, 
therefore, potentially variable in value, can gold serve as a measure 
of value. 1 ||It is, in the first place, quite clear that a change in the value 
of gold does not, in any way, affect its function as a standard of 
price. No matter how this value varies, the proportions between 
the values of different quantities of the metal remain constant. 
However great the fall in its value, 12 ounces of gold still have 
12 times the value of 1 ounce; and in prices, the only thing consid- 
ered is the relation between different quantities of gold. Since, on 
the other hand, no rise or fall in the value of an ounce of gold can 
alter its weight, no alteration can take place in the weight of its 
aliquot parts. Thus gold always renders the same service as an 
invariable standard of price, however much its value may vary. ||Just as when we estimate the value of any commodity by 
a definite quantity of the use-value of some other commodity, 
so in estimating the value of the former in gold, we assume noth- 
ing more than that the production of a given quantity of gold 
costs, at the given period, a given amount of labour. As regards 
the fluctuations of prices generally, they are subject to the laws 
of elementary relative value investigated in a former chapter. ||A general rise in the prices of commodities can result only, 
either from a rise in their values— the value of money remaining 
constant— or from a fall in the value of money, the values 
of commodities remaining constant. On the other hand, a general 
fall in prices can result only, either from a fall in the values of 
commodities— the value of money remaining constant— or 
from a rise in the value of money, the values of commodities re- 
maining constant. It therefore by no means follows, that a rise in 
the value of money necessarily implies a proportional fall in the 
prices of commodities; or that a fall in the value of money implies 
a proportional rise in prices. Such change of price holds good only 
in the case of commodities whose value remains constant. With 
those, for example, whose value rises, simultaneously with, and 
proportionally to, that of money, there is no alteration in price. 
And if their value rise either slower or faster than that of money, 
the fall or rise in their prices will be determined by the differ- 
ence between the change in their value and that of money; and 
so on. ||By degrees there arises a discrepancy between the current 
money-names of the various weights of the precious metal 
figuring as money, and the actual weights which those names 
originally represented. This discrepancy is the result of his- 
torical causes, among which the chief are: — (1) The importation 
of foreign money into an imperfectly developed community. 
This happened in Rome in its early days, where gold and silver 
coins circulated at first as foreign commodities. The names of 
these foreign coins never coincide with those of the indigenous 
weights. (2) As wealth increases, the less precious metal is thrust 
out by the more precious from its place as a measure of value, 
copper by silver, silver by gold, however much this order of se- 
quence may be in contradiction with poetical chronology. 1 The 
word pound, for instance, was the money-name given to an actual 
pound weight of silver. When gold replaced silver as a measure 
of value, the same name was applied according to the ratio be- 
tween the values of silver and gold, to perhaps l-15th of a pound 
of gold. The word pound, as a money-name, thus becomes differen- 
tiated from the same word as a weight-name. 2 (3) The debasing ||These historical causes convert the separation of the money- 
name from the weight-name into an established habit with the 
community. Since the standard of money is on the one hand purely 
conventional, and must on the other hand find general accept- 
ance, it is in the end regulated by law. A given weight of one of the 
precious metals, an ounce of gold, for instance, becomes officially 
divided into aliquot parts, with legally bestowed names, such 
as pound, dollar, &c. These aliquot parts, which thenceforth 
serve as units of money, are then subdivided into other aliquot 
parts with legal names, such as shilling, penny, &c. 2 But, both 
before and after these divisions are made, a definite weight of 
metal is the standard of metallic money. The sole alteration con- 
sists in the subdivision and denomination. ||they are worth, and money serves as money of account whenever 
it is a question of fixing the value of an article in its money-form, 3 
The name of a thing is something distinct from the qualities 
of that thing. I know nothing of a man, by knowing that his 
name is Jacob. In the same way with regard to money, every 
trace of a value-relation disappears in the names pound, dollar, 
franc, ducat, &c. The confusion caused by attributing a hidden 
meaning to these cabalistic signs is all the greater, because these 
money-names express both the values of commodities, and, at 
the same time, aliquot parts of the weight of the metal that is ||2 David Urquhart remarks in his "Familiar Words" on the monstros- 
ity (!) that now-a-days a pound (sterling), which is the unit of the English 
standard of money, is equal to about a quarter of an ounce of gold. "This is 
falsifying a measure, not establishing a standard." He sees in this "false de- 
nomination" of the weight of gold, as in everything else, the falsifying hand 
of civilisation. ||Price is the money-name of the labour realised in a commodity. 
Hence the expression of the equivalence of a commodity with 
the sum of money constituting its price, is a tautology, 8 just 
as in general the expression of the relative value of a commodity 
is a statement of the equivalence of two commodities. But although 
price, being the exponent of the magnitude of a commodity's 
value, is the exponent of its exchange-ratio with money, it does 
not follow that the exponent of this exchange-ratio is necessarily 
the exponent of the magnitude of the commodity's value. Sup- 
pose two equal quantities of socially necessary labour to be respec- 
tively represented by 1 quarter of wheat and £2 (nearly */ 2 oz. 
of gold), £2 is the expression in money of the magnitude of the 
value of the quarter of wheat, or is its price. If now circumstances 
allow of this price being raised to £3, or compel it to be reduced 
to £1, then although £1 and £3 may be too small or too great 
properly to express the magnitude of the wheat's value, neverthe- ||1 "Owing to the fact that money, when serving as the standard oi price, 
appears under the same reckoning names as do the prices of commodities, 
and that therefore the sum of £3 17s. 10 -^ d. may signify on the one hand 
an ounce weight of gold, and on the other, the value of a ton of iron, this 
reckoning name of money has been called its mint-price. Hence there sprang 
up the extraordinary notion, that the value of gold is estimated in its own 
material, and that, in contradistinction to all other commodities, its price 
is fixed by the State. It was erroneously thought that the giving of reckoning 
names to definite weights of gold, is the same thing as fixing the value of 
those weights." (Karl Marx, 1. c, p. 52.) ||2 See "Theorien von der Masseinheit des Geldes" in "Zur Kntik der 
Pol. Oekon. &c," p. 53, seq. The fantastic notions about raising or lowering 
the mint -price of money by transferring to greater or smaller weights of 
gold or silver the names already legally appropriated to fixed weights of 
those metals; such notions, at least in those cases in which they aim, not 
at clumsy financial operations against creditors, both public and private, 
but at economic quack remedies, have been so exhaustively treated by Wm. 
Petty in his "Quantulumcunaue concerning money: To the Lord Marquis of 
Halifax, 1682," that even his immediate followers, Sir Dudley North and 
John Locke, not to mention later ones, could only dilute him. "If the wealth 
of a nation," he remarks, "could be decupled by a proclamation, it were 
strange that such proclamations have not long since been made by our 
Governors." (1. c, p. 36.) ||less they are its prices, for they are, in the first place, the form 
under which its value appears, i.e., money; and in the second 
place, the exponents of its exchange-ratio with money. If the 
conditions of production, in other words, if the productive power 
of labour remain constant, the same amount of social labour-time 
must, both before and after the change in price, be expended in the 
reproduction of a quarter of wheat. This circumstance depends, 
neither on the will of the wheat producer, nor on that of the owners 
of other commodities. ||Magnitude of value expresses a relation of social production, 
it expresses the connexion that necessarily exists between a cer- 
tain article and the portion of the total labour-time of society 
required to produce it. As soon as magnitude of value is converted 
into price, the above necessary relation takes the shape of a more 
or less accidental exchange-ratio between a single commodity 
and another, the money-commodity. But this exchange-ratio may 
express either the real magnitude of that commodity's value, 
or the quantity of gold deviating from that value, for which, 
according to circumstances, it may be parted with. The possibility, 
therefore, of quantitative incongruity between price and magni- 
tude of value, or the deviation of the former from the latter, is 
inherent in the price-form itself. This is no defect, but, on the 
contrary, admirably adapts the price-form to a mode of production 
whose inherent laws impose themselves only as the mean of appar- 
ently lawless irregularities that compensate one another. ||The price-form, however, is not only compatible with the 
possibility of a quantitative incongruity between magnitude 
of value and price, i.e., between the former and its expression 
in money, but it may also conceal a qualitative inconsistency, so 
much so, that, although money is nothing but the value-form of 
commodities, price ceases altogether to express value. Objects 
that in themselves are no commodities, such as conscience, honour, 
&c, are capable of being offered for sale by their holders, and 
of thus acquiring, through their price, the form of commodities. 
Hence an object may have a price without having value. The 
price in that case is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathe- 
matics. On the other hand, the imaginary price-form may some- 
times conceal either a direct or indirect real value-relation; for in- 
stance, the price of uncultivated land, which is without value, 
because no human labour has been incorporated in it. ||able for iron. But it by no means states the converse, that 
iron is directly exchangeable for gold. In order, therefore, that 
a commodity may in practice act effectively as exchange-value, 
it must quit its bodily shape, must transform itself from mere 
imaginary into real gold, although to the commodity such tran- 
substantiation may be more difficult than to the Hegelian "con- 
cept," the transition from "necessity" to "freedom," or to a lobster 
the casting of his shell, or to Saint Jerome the putting off of the 
old Adam. l Though a commodity may, side by side with its actual 
form (iron, for instance), take in our imagination the form of 
gold, yet it cannot at one and the same time actually be both 
iron and gold. To fix its price, it suffices to equate it to gold in 
imagination. But to enable it to render to its owner the service 
of a universal equivalent, it must be actually replaced by gold. 
If the owner of the iron were to go to the owner of some other 
commodity offered for exchange, and were to refer him to the price 
of the iron as proof that it was already money, he would get the 
same answer as St. Peter gave in heaven to Dante, when the latter 
recited the creed — ||A price therefore implies both that a commodity is exchange- 
able for money, and also that it must be so exchanged. On the 
other hand, gold serves as an ideal measure of value, only because 
it has already, in the process of exchange, established itself as 
the money-commodity. Under the ideal measure of values there 
lurks the hard cash. ||1 Jerome had to wrestle hard, not only in his youth with the hodily 
flesh, as is shown by his fight in the desert with the handsome women of his 
imagination, but also in his old age with the spiritual flesh. "I thought," he 
says, "I was in the spirit before the Judge of the Universe." "Who art thou?" 
asked a voice. "I am a Christian." "Thou liest," thundered back the great 
Judge, "thou art nought but a Ciceronian." ||In so far as exchange is a process, by which commodities are 
transferred from hands in which they are non-use-values, to 
hands in which they become use-values, it is a social circulation 
of matter. The product of one form of useful labour replaces that 
of another. When once a commodity has found a resting-place, 
where it can serve as a use-value, it falls out of the sphere of ex- 
change into that of consumption. But the former sphere alone in- 
terests us at present. We have, therefore, now to consider exchange 
from a formal point of view; to investigate the change of form or 
metamorphosis of commodities which effectuates the social cir- 
culation of matter. ||The comprehension of this change of form is, as a rule, very 
imperfect. The cause of this imperfection is, apart from indis- 
tinct notions of value itself, that every change of form in a com- 
modity results from the exchange of two commodities, an ordinary 
one and the money-commodity. If we keep in view the material 
fact alone that a commodity has been exchanged for gold, we 
overlook the very thing that we ought to observe — namely, 
what has happened to the form of the commodity. We overlook 
the facts that gold, when a mere commodity, is not money, and 
that when other commodities express their prices in gold, this 
gold is but the money-form of those commodities themselves. ||Commodities, first of all, enter into the process of exchange 
just as they are. The process then differentiates them into commodi- 
ties and money, and thus produces an external opposition corre- 
sponding to the internal opposition inherent in them, as being 
at once use-values and values. Commodities as use-values now 
stand opposed to money as exchange-value. On the other hand, 
both opposing sides are commodities, unities of use-value and 
value. But this unity of differences manifests itself at two opposite 
poles, and at each pole in an opposite way. Being poles they are 
as necessarily opposite as they are connected. On the one side of 
the equation we have an ordinary commodity, which is in reality 
a use-value. Its value is expressed only ideally in its price, by 
which it is equated to its opponent, the gold, as to the real em- 
bodiment of its value. On the other hand, the gold, in its metallic 
reality, ranks as the embodiment of value, as money. Gold, as 
gold, is exchange-value itself. As to its use-value, that has only ||Let us now accompany the owner of some commodity — say, 
our old friend the weaver of linen— to the scene of action, the 
market. His 20 yards of linen has a definite price, £2. He ex- 
changes it for the £2, and then, like a man of the good old stamp 
that he is, he parts with the £2 for a family Bible of the same 
price. The linen, which in his eyes is a mere commodity, a depos- 
itory of value, he alienates in exchange for gold, which is the 
linen's value-form, and this form he again parts with for another 
commodity, the Bible, which is destined to enter his house as 
an object of utility and of edification to its inmates. The exchange 
becomes an accomplished fact by two metamorphoses of opposite 
yet supplementary character — the conversion of the commodity 
into money, and the re-conversion of the money into a commodity. l 
The two phases of this metamorphosis are both of them distinct 
transactions of the weaver — selling, or the exchange of the com- 
modity for money; buying, or the exchange of the money for a 
commodity; and, the unity of the two acts, selling in order to buy. ||The result of the whole transaction, as regards the weaver, 
is this, that instead of being in possession of the linen, he now 
has the Bible; instead of his original commodity, he now possesses 
another of the same value but of different utility. In like manner 
he procures his other means of subsistence and means of production. 
From his point of view, the whole process effectuates nothing 
more than the exchange of the product of his labour for the 
product of some one else's, nothing more than an exchange of 
products. ||The leap taken by value from the body of the commodity, 
into the body of the gold, is, as I have elsewhere called it, the 
salto mortale of the commodity. If it falls short, then, although 
the commodity itself is not harmed, its owner decidedly is. 
The social division of labour causes his labour to be as one-sided 
as his wants are many-sided. This is precisely the reason why the 
product of his labour serves him solely as exchange-value. But it 
cannot acquire the properties of a socially recognised universal 
equivalent, except by being converted into money. That money, 
however, is in some one else's pocket. In order to entice the money 
out of that pocket, our friend's commodity must, above all things, 
be a use-value to the owner of the money. For this, it is necessary 
that the labour expended upon it, be of a kind that is socially use- 
ful, of a kind that constitutes a branch of the social division of 
labour. But division of labour is a system of production which 
has grown up spontaneously and continues to grow behind the 
backs of the producers. The commodity to be exchanged may 
possibly be the product of some new kind of labour, that pretends 
to satisfy newly arisen requirements, or even to give rise itself 
to new requirements. A particular operation, though yesterday, 
perhaps, forming one out of the many operations conducted by 
one producer in creating a given commodity, may to-day separate 
itself from this connexion, may establish itself as an independ- 
ent branch of labour and send its incomplete product to market 
as an independent commodity. The circumstances may or may 
not be ripe for such a separation. To-day the product satisfies a 
social want. To-morrow the article may, either altogether or par- 
tially, be superseded by some other appropriate product. Moreover, 
although our weaver's labour may be a recognised branch of the 
social division of labour, yet that fact is by no means sufficient to 
guarantee the utility of his 20 yards of linen. If the community's 
want of linen, and such a want has a limit like every other want, 
should already be saturated by the products of rival weavers, our 
friend's product is superfluous, redundant, and consequently 
useless. Although people do not look a gift-horse in the mouth, 
our friend does not frequent the market for the purpose of making 
presents. But suppose his product turn out a real use-value, ||and thereby attracts money? The question arises, how much 
will it attract? No doubt the answer is already anticipated in 
the price of the article, in the exponent of the magnitude of its 
value. We leave out of consideration here any accidental miscal- 
culation of value by our friend, a mistake that is soon rectified 
in the market. We suppose him to have spent on his product only 
that amount of labour-time that is on an average socially necessa- 
ry. The price then, is merely the money-name of the quantity of 
social labour realised in his commodity. But without the leave, 
and behind the back, of our weaver, the old-fashioned mode of 
weaving undergoes a change. The labour-time that yesterday 
was without doubt socially necessary to the production of a yard 
of linen, ceases to be so to-day, a fact which the owner of the money 
is only too eager to prove from the prices quoted by our friend's 
competitors. Unluckily for him, weavers are not few and far be- 
tween. Lastly, suppose that every piece of linen in the market 
contains no more labour-time than is socially necessary. In spite 
of this, all these pieces taken as a whole, may have had super- 
fluous labour-time spent upon them. If the market cannot stomach 
the whole quantity at the normal price of 2 shillings a yard, this 
proves that too great a portion of the total labour of the community 
has been expended in the form of weaving. The effect is the same 
as if each individual weaver had expended more labour-time 
upon his particular product than is socially necessary. Here we 
may say, with the German proverb: caught together, hung together. 
All the linen in the market counts but as one article of commerce, 
of which each piece is only an aliquot part. And as a matter of 
fact, the value also of each single yard is but the materialised 
form of the same definite and socially fixed quantity of homoge- 
neous human labour.* ||We see then, commodities are in love with money, but "the 
course of true love never did run smooth." The quantitative 
division of labour is brought about in exactly the same spon- 
taneous and accidental manner as its qualitative division. The 
owners of commodities therefore find out, that the same division 
of labour that turns them into independent private producers, ||* Tn his letter of November 28, 1878, to N. F. Danielson (Nikolai— on) 
Marx proposed that this sentence be corrected to read as follows: "And, as 
a matter of fact, the value of each single yard is but the materialised form 
of a part of the social labour expended on the whole number of yards." An 
analogous correction was made in a copy of the second German edition of 
the first volume of "Capital" belonging to Marx; however, not in his hand- 
writing. — Note by the Institute of Marxism- Leninism in the Russian 
edition. ||also frees the social process of production and the relations of the 
individual producers to each other within that process, from all 
dependence on the will of those producers, and that the seeming 
mutual independence of the individuals is supplemented by a 
system of general and mutual dependence through or by means 
of the products. ||The division of labour converts the product of labour into a 
commodity, and thereby makes necessary its further conversion 
into money. At the same time it also makes the accomplishment 
of this transubstantiation quite accidental. Here, however, 
we are only concerned with the phenomenon in its integrity, and 
we therefore assume its progress to be normal. Moreover, if the 
conversion take place at all, that is, if the commodity be not 
absolutely unsaleable, its metamorphosis does take place although 
the price realised may be abnormally above or below the value. ||The seller has his commodity replaced by gold, the buyer 
has his gold replaced by a commodity. The fact which here stares 
us in the face is, that a commodity and gold, 20 yards of linen and 
£2, have changed hands and places, in other words, that they 
have been exchanged. But for what is the commodity exchanged? 
For the shape assumed by its own value, for the universal equiva- 
lent. And for what is the gold exchanged? For a particular form of 
its own use-value. Why does gold take the form of money face 
to face with the linen? Because the linen's price of £2, its de- 
nomination in money, has already equated the linen to gold in its 
character of money. A commodity strips off its original commodity- 
form on being alienated, i.e., on the instant its use-value actually 
attracts the gold, that before existed only ideally in its price. 
The realisation of a commodity's price, or of its ideal value-form, 
is therefore at the same time the realisation of the ideal use-value 
of money; the conversion of a commodity into money, is the simul- 
taneous conversion of money into a commodity. The apparently 
single process is in reality a double one. From the pole of the com- 
modity-owner it is a sale, from the opposite pole of the money- 
owner, it is a purchase. In other words, a sale is a purchase, C — M 
is also M— C. 1 ||alienating that of their own labour. Hence, for one commodity- 
owner to meet with another who has money, it is necessary, either, 
that the product of the labour of the latter person, the buyer, 
should be in itself money, should be gold, the material of which 
money consists, or that his product should already have changed 
its skin and have stripped off its original form of a useful object. 
In order that it may play the part of money, gold must of cours3 
enter the market at some point or other. This point is to be found 
at the source of production of the metal, at which place gold is 
bartered, as the immediate product of labour, for some other 
product of equal value. From that moment it always represents 
the realised price of some commodity. 1 Apart from its exchange 
for other commodities at the source of its production, gold, in 
whose-so-ever hands it may be, is the transformed shape of some 
commodity alienated by its owner; it is the product of a sale or 
of the first metamorphosis G — M. 2 Gold, as we saw, became ideal 
money, or a measure of values, in consequence of all commodities 
measuring their values by it, and thus contrasting it ideally with 
their natural shape as useful objects, and making it the shape 
of their value. It became real money, by the general alienation 
of commodities, by actually changing places with their natural 
forms as useful objects, and thus becoming in reality the embodi- 
ment of their values. When they assume this money-shape, com- 
modities strip off every trace of their natural use-value, and of 
the particular kind of labour to which they owe their creation, 
in order to transform themselves into the uniform, socially recog- 
nised incarnation of homogeneous human labour. We cannot tell 
from the mere look of a piece of money, for what particular com- 
modity it has been exchanged. Under their money-form all com- 
modities look alike. Hence, money may be dirt, although dirt is 
not money. We will assume that the two gold pieces, in considera- 
tion of which our weaver has parted with his linen, are the meta- 
morphosed shape of a quarter of wheat. The sale of the linen, 
G— M, is at the same time its purchase, M— G. But the sale is 
the first act of a process that ends with a transaction of an opposite 
nature, namely, the purchase of a Bible; the purchase of the linen, 
on the other hand, ends a movement that began with a transac- 
tion of an opposite nature, namely, with the sale of the wheat. ||G — M (linen — money), which is the first phase of G — M — C (linen — 
money — Bible), is also M — C (money — linen), the last phase 
of another movement C — M — C (wheat — money — linen). The first 
metamorphosis of one commodity, its transformation from a com- 
modity into money, is therefore also invariably the second meta- 
morphosis of some other commodity, the retransformation of the 
latter from money into a commodity. * ||Because money is the metamorphosed shape of all other com- 
modities, the result of their general alienation, for this reason 
it is alienable itself without restriction or condition. It reads all 
prices backwards, and thus, so to say, depicts itself in the bodies 
of all other commodities, which offer to it the material for the 
realisation of its own use-value. At the same time the prices, 
wooing glances cast at money by commodities, define the limits 
of its convertibility, by pointing to its quantity. Since every 
commodity, on becoming money, disappears as a commodi- 
ty, it is impossible to tell from the money itself, how it got 
into the hands of its possessor, or what article has been changed 
into it. Non olet, from whatever source it may come. Represent- 
ing on the one hand a sold commodity, it represents on the other 
a commodity to be bought. 2 ||M— C, a purchase, is, at the same time, C— M, a sale; the con- 
cluding metamorphosis of one commodity is the first metamor- 
phosis of another. With regard to our weaver, the life of his com- 
modity ends with the Bible, into which he has reconverted his £2. 
But suppose the seller of the Bible turns the £2 set free by the 
weaver into brandy M— C, the concluding phase of C— M— C 
(linen, money, Bible), is also C — M, the first phase of C — M — G 
(Bible, money, brandy). The producer of a particular commodity 
has that one article alone to offer; this he sells very often in large 
quantities, but his many and various wants compel him to split 
up the price realised, the sum of money set free, into numerous 
purchases. Hence a sale leads to many purchases of various arti- ||If we now consider the completed metamorphosis of a com- 
modity, as a whole, it appears in the first place, that it is made 
up of two opposite and complementary movements, C — M and 
M — G. These two antithetical transmutations of a commodity 
are brought about by two antithetical social acts on the part 
of the owner, and these acts in their turn stamp the character 
of the economic parts played by him. As the person who makes 
a sale, he is a seller; as the person who makes a purchase, he is a 
buyer. But just as, upon every such transmutation of a commodity, 
its two forms, commodity-form and money-form, exist simulta- 
neously but at opposite poles, so every seller has a buyer opposed 
to him, and every buyer a seller. While one particular commodity 
is going through its two transmutations in succession, from a com- 
modity into money and from money into another commodity, 
the owner of the commodity changes in succession his part from 
that of seller to that of buyer. These characters of seller and buyer 
are therefore not permanent, but attach themselves in turns to 
the various persons engaged in the circulation of commodities. ||The complete metamorphosis of a commodity, in its simplest 
form, implies four extremes, and three dramatis personae. First, 
a commodity comes face to face with money; the latter is the form 
taken by the value of the former, and exists in all its hard reality, 
in the pocket of the buyer. A commodity-owner is thus brought into 
contact with a possessor of money. So soon, now, as the commodity 
has been changed into money, the money becomes its transient 
equivalent-form, the use-value of which equivalent-form is to be 
found in the bodies of other commodities. Money, the final term 
of the first transmutation, is at the same time the starting-point 
for the second. The person who is a seller in the first transaction 
thus becomes a buyer in the second, in which a third commodity- 
owner appears on the scene as a seller. 1 ||The two phases, each inverse to the other, that make up the 
metamorphosis of a commodity constitute together a circular 
movement, a circuit: commodity-form, stripping off of this form, 
and return to the commodity-form. No doubt, the commodity 
appears here under two different aspects. At the starting-point 
it is not a use-value to its owner; at the finishing point it is. So, 
too, the money appears in the first phase as a solid crystal of ||The two metamorphoses constituting the circuit are at the 
same time two inverse partial metamorphoses of two other com- 
modities. One and the same commodity, the linen, opens the series 
of its own metamorphoses, and completes the metamorphosis of 
another (the wheat). In the first phase or sale, the linen plays 
these two parts in its own person. But, then, changed into gold, 
it completes its own second and final metamorphosis, and helps 
at the same time to accomplish the first metamorphosis of a third 
commodity. Hence the circuit made by one commodity in the 
course of its metamorphoses is inextricably mixed up with the 
circuits of other commodities. The total of all the different circuits 
constitutes the circulation of commodities. ||The circulation of commodities differs from the direct ex- 
change of products (barter), not only in form, but in substance. 
Only consider the course of events. The weaver has, as a matter 
of fact, exchanged his linen for a Bible, his own commodity for 
that of some one else. But this is true only so far as he himself 
is concerned. The seller of the Bible, who prefers something to 
warm his inside, no more thought of exchanging his Bible for 
linen than our weaver knew that wheat had been exchanged for 
his linen. B's commodity replaces that of A, but A and B do not 
mutually exchange those commodities. It may, of course, happen 
that A and B make simultaneous purchases, the one from the oth- 
er; but such exceptional transactions are by no means the neces- 
sary result of the general conditions of the circulation of commodi- 
ties. We see here, on the one hand, how the exchange of commodi- 
ties breaks through all local and personal bounds inseparable from 
direct barter, and develops the circulation of the products of 
social labour; and on the other hand, how it develops a whole 
network of social relations spontaneous in their growth and entire- 
ly beyond the control of the actors. It is only because the farmer 
has sold his wheat that the weaver is enabled to sell his linen, 
only because the weaver has sold his linen that our Hotspur is 
enabled to sell his Bible, and only because the latter has sold 
the water of everlasting life that the distiller is enabled to sell 
his eau-de-vie, and so on. ||It is constantly being precipitated into new places in the arena 
of circulation vacated by other commodities. In the complete 
metamorphosis of the linen, for example, linen — money — Bible, 
the linen first falls out of circulation, and money steps into its 
place. Then the Bible falls out of circulation, and again money 
takes its place. When one commodity replaces another, the money- 
commodity always sticks to the hands of some third person. 1 
Circulation sweats money from every pore. ||Nothing can be more childish than the dogma, that because 
every sale is a purchase, and every purchase a sale, therefore the 
circulation of commodities necessarily implies an equilibrium of 
sales and purchases. If this means that the number of actual sales 
is equal to the number of purchases, it is mere tautology. But its 
real purport is to prove that every seller brings his buyer to 
market with him. Nothing of the kind. The sale and the purchase 
constitute one identical act, an exchange between a commodity- 
owner and an owner of money, between two persons as opposed 
to each other as the two poles of a magnet. They form two distinct 
acts, of polar and opposite characters, when performed by one 
single person. Hence the identity of sale and purchase implies 
that the commodity is useless, if, on being thrown into the alche- 
mistical retort of circulation, it does not come out again in the 
shape of money; if, in other words, it cannot be sold by its owner, 
and therefore be bought by the owner of the money. That identity 
further implies that the exchange, if it do take place, constitutes 
a period of rest, an interval, long or short, in the life of the com- 
modity. Since the first metamorphosis of a commodity is at once 
a sale and a purchase, it is also an independent process in itself. 
The purchaser has the commodity, the seller has the money, i.e., 
a commodity ready to go into circulation at any time. No one 
can sell unless some one else purchases. But no one is forthwith 
bound to purchase, because he has just sold. Circulation bursts 
through all restrictions as to time, place, and individuals, im- 
posed by direct barter, and this it effects by splitting up, into the 
antithesis of a sale and a purchase, the direct identity that in 
barter does exist between the alienation of one's own and the acqui- 
sition of some other man's product. To say that these two independ- 
ent and antithetical acts have an intrinsic unity, are essentially 
one, is the same as to say that this intrinsic oneness expresses itself 
in an external antithesis. If the interval in time between the two ||complementary phases of the complete metamorphosis of a com- 
modity become too great, if the split between the sale and the 
purchase become too pronounced, the intimate connexion between 
them, their oneness, asserts itself by producing — a crisis. The 
antithesis, use-value and value; the contradictions that private 
labour is bound to manifest itself as direct social labour, that a 
particularised concrete kind of labour has to pass for abstract 
human labour; the contradiction between the personification of 
objects and the representation of persons by things; all these an- 
titheses and contradictions, which are immanent in commodities, 
assert themselves, and develop their modes of motion, in the 
antithetical phases of the metamorphosis of a commodity. These 
modes therefore imply the possibility, and no more than the possi- 
bility, of crises. The conversion of this mere possibility into a 
reality is the result of a long series of relations, that, from our 
present standpoint of simple circulation, have as yet no existence. * ||The change of form, C — M — G, by which the circulation of 
the material products of labour is brought about, requires that 
a given value in the shape of a commodity shall begin the process, 
and shall, also in the shape of a commodity, end it. The move- 
ment of the commodity is therefore a circuit. On the other hand, 
the form of this movement precludes a circuit from being made 
by the money. The result is not the return of the money, but its 
continued removal further and further away from its starting- ||1 See my observations on James Mill in "Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 74-76. 
With regard to this subject, we may notice two methods characteristic of 
apologetic economy. The first is the identification of the circulation of com- 
modities with the direct barter of products, by simple abstraction from their 
points of difference: the second is, the attempt to explain away the contradic- 
tions of capitalist production, by reducing the relations between the persons 
engaged in that mode of production, to the simple relations arising out of 
the circulation of commodities. The production and circulation of commodi- 
ties are, however, phenomena that occur to a greater or less extent in modes 
of production the most diverse. If we are acquainted with nothing but the 
abstract categories of circulation, which are common to all these modes 
of production, we cannot possibly know anything of the specific points of 
difference of those modes, nor pronounce any judgment upon them. In no science 
is such a big fuss made with commonplace truisms as in Political Economy. 
For instance, J B Say sets himself up as a judge of crises, because, forsooth, 
he knows that a commodity is a product. ||point. So long as the seller sticks fast to his money, which is the 
transformed shape of his commodity, that commodity is still in 
the first phase of its metamorphosis, and has completed only half 
its course. But so soon as he completes the process, so soon as he 
supplements his sale by a purchase, the money again leaves the 
hands of its possessor. It is true that if the weaver, after buying the 
Bible, sell more linen, money comes back into his hands. But this 
return is not owing to the circulation of the first 20 yards of linen; 
that circulation resulted in the money getting i nto the hands of the 
seller of the Bible. The return of money into the hands of the weaver 
is brought about only by the renewal or repetition of the process 
of circulation with a fresh commodity, which renewed process ends 
with the same result as its predecessor did. Hence the movement 
directly imparted to money by the circulation of commodities 
takes the form of a constant motion away from its starting-point, 
of a course from the hands of one commodity-owner into those of 
another. This course constitutes its currency (cours de la monnaie). 
The currency of money is the constant and monotonous 
repetition of the same process. The commodity is always in the 
hands of the seller; the money, as a means of purchase, always 
in the hands of the buyer. And money serves as a means of purchase 
by realising the price of the commodity. This realisation transfers 
the commodity from the seller to the buyer and removes the money 
from the hands of the buyer into those of the seller, where it again 
goes through the same process with another, commodity. That 
this one-sided character of the money's motion arises out of the 
two-sided character of the commodity's motion, is a circumstance 
that is veiled over. The very nature of the circulation of commodi- 
ties begets the opposite appearance. The first metamorphosis of 
a commodity is visibly, not only the money's movement, but also 
that of the commodity itself; in the second metamorphosis, on 
the contrary, the movement appears to us as the movement of the 
money alone. In the first phase of its circulation the commodity 
changes place with the money. Thereupon the commodity, under 
its aspect of a useful object, falls out of circulation into consump- 
tion. 1 In its stead we have its value-shape— the money. It then 
goes through the second phase of its circulation, not under its 
own natural shape, but under the shape of money. The continuity 
of the movement is therefore kept up by the money alone, and ||the same movement that as regards the commodity consists of 
two processes of an antithetical character, is, when considered as 
the movement of the money, always one and the same process, 
a continued change of places with ever fresh commodities. Hence 
the result brought about by the circulation of commodities, 
namely, the replacing of one commodity by another, takes the 
appearance of having been effected not by means of the change of 
form of the commodities, but rather by the money acting as a 
medium of circulation, by an action that circulates commodities, 
to all appearance motionless in themselves, and transfers them 
from hands in which they are non-use-values, to hands in which 
they are use-values; and that in a direction constantly opposed 
to the direction of the money. The latter is continually with- 
drawing commodities from circulation and stepping into their 
places, and in this way continually moving further and further 
from its starting-point. Hence although the movement of the money 
is merely the expression of the circulation of commodities, yet 
the contrary appears to be the actual fact, and the circulation of 
commodities seems to be the result of the movement of the money. 1 
Again, money functions as a means of circulation only because 
in it the values of commodities have independent reality. Hence 
its movement, as the medium of circulation, is, in fact, merely 
the movement of commodities while changing their form. This 
fact must therefore make itself plainly visible in the currency of 
money. Thus* the linen, for instance, first of all changes its 
commodity-form into its money-form. The second term of its 
first metamorphosis, C — M, the money-form, then becomes the 
first term of its final metamorphosis, M — C, its re-conversion into 
the Bible. But each of these two changes of form is accomplished 
by an exchange between commodity and money, by their recip- 
rocal displacement. The same pieces of coin come into the seller's 
hand as the alienated form of the commodity and leave it as the 
absolutely alienable form of the commodity. They are displaced 
twice. The first metamorphosis of the linen puts these coins into 
the weaver's pocket, the second draws them out of it. The two 
inverse changes undergone by the same commodity are reflected 
in the displacement, twice repeated, but in opposite directions, 
of the same pieces of coin. ||If, on the contrary, only one phase of the metamorphosis is 
gone through, if there are only sales or only purchases, then a 
given piece of money changes its place only once. Its second change 
of place always expresses the second metamorphosis of the com- 
modity, its re-conversion from money. The frequent repetition of 
the displacement of the same coins reflects not only the series of 
metamorphoses that a single commodity has gone through, but 
also the intertwining of the innumerable metamorphoses in the 
world of commodities in general. It is a matter of course, that all 
this is applicable to the simple circulation of commodities alone, 
the only form that we are now considering. ||Every commodity, when it first steps into circulation, and 
undergoes its first change of form, does so only to fall out of circu- 
lation again and to be replaced by other commodities. Money, on 
the contrary, as the medium of circulation, keeps continually within 
the sphere of circulation, and moves about in it. The question 
therefore arises, how much money this sphere constantly absorbs? ||In a given country there take place every day at the same 
time, but in different localities, numerous one-sided metamor- 
phoses of commodities, or, in other words, numerous sales and nu- 
merous purchases. The commodities are equated beforehand in im- 
agination, by their prices, to definite quantities of money. And 
since, in the form of circulation now under consideration, money 
and commodities always come bodily face to face, one at the pos- 
itive pole of purchase, the other at the negative pole of sale, it 
is clear that the amount of the means of circulation required, is 
determined beforehand by the sum of the prices of all these com- 
modities. As a matter of fact, the money in reality represents the 
quantity or sum of gold ideally expressed beforehand by the sum 
of the prices of the commodities. The equality of these two sums 
is therefore self-evident. We know, however, that, the values of 
commodities remaining constant, their prices vary with the value 
of gold (the material of money), rising in proportion as it falls, 
and falling in proportion as it rises. Now if, in consequence of 
such a rise or fall in the value of gold, the sum of the prices of 
commodities fall or rise, the quantity of money in currency must 
fall or rise to the same extent. The change in the quantity of the 
circulating medium is, in this case, it is true, caused by the money 
itself, vet not in virtue of its function as a medium of circulation, 
but of its function as a measure of value. First, the price of the 
commodities varies inversely as the value of the money, and then 
the quantity of the medium of circulation varies directly as the 
price of the commodities, Exactly the same thing would happen ||if, for instance, instead of the value of gold falling, gold were re- 
placed by silver as the measure of value, or if, instead of the value 
of silver rising, gold were to thrust silver out from being the 
measure of value. In the one case, more silver would be current 
than gold was before, in the other case, less gold would be current 
than silver was before. In each case the value of the material of 
money, i.e., the value of the commodity that serves as the meas- 
ure of value, would have undergone a change, and therefore so, 
too, would the prices of commodities which express their values 
in money, and so, too, would the quantity of money current whose 
function it is to realise those prices. We have already seen, that 
the sphere of circulation has an opening through which gold (or 
the material of money generally) enters into it as a commodity 
with a given value. Hence, when money enters on its functions as a 
measure of value, when it expresses prices, its value is already 
determined. If now its value fall, this fact is first evidenced by a 
change in the prices of those commodities that are directly bar- 
tered for the precious metals at the sources of their production. The 
greater part of all other commodities, especially in the imperfectly 
developed stages of civil society, will continue for a long time to 
be estimated by the former antiquated and illusory value of the 
measure of value. Nevertheless, one commodity infects another 
through their common value-relation, so that their prices, expressed 
in gold or in silver, gradually settle down into the proportions 
determined by their comparative values, until finally the values 
of all commodities are estimated in terms of the new value of the 
metal that constitutes money. This process is accompanied by 
the continued increase in the quantity of the precious metals, 
an increase caused by their streaming in to replace the articles 
directly bartered for them at their sources of production. In pro- 
portion therefore as commodities in general acquire their true 
prices, in proportion as their values become estimated according 
to the fallen value of the precious metal, in the same proportion 
the quantity of that metal necessary for realising those new prices 
is provided beforehand. A one-sided observation of the results 
that followed upon the discovery of fresh supplies of gold and sil- 
ver, led some economists in the 17th, and particularly in the 18th 
century, to the false conclusion, that the prices of commodities 
had gone up in consequence of the increased quantity of gold and 
silver serving as means of circulation. Henceforth we shall con- 
sider the value of gold to be given, as, in fact, it'is momentarily 
whenever we estimate the price of a commodity. ||culation is determined by the sum of the prices that have to be 
realised. If now we further suppose the price of each commodity 
to be given, the sum of the prices clearly depends on the mass of 
commodities in circulation. It requires but little racking of 
brains to comprehend that if one quarter of wheat costs £2, 100 
quarters will cost £200, 200 quarters £400, and so on, that 
consequently the quantity of money that changes place with the 
wheat, when sold, must increase with the quantity of that wheat. ||If the mass of commodities remain constant, the quantity of 
circulating money varies with the fluctuations in the prices of 
those commodities. It increases and diminishes because the sum 
of the prices increases or diminishes in consequence of the change 
of price. To produce this effect, it is by no means requisite that 
the prices of all commodities should rise or fall simultaneously. 
A rise or a fall in the prices of a number of leading articles, is 
sufficient in the one case to increase in the other to diminish, the 
sum of the prices of all commodities, and, therefore, to put more 
or less money in circulation. Whether the change in the price corre- 
spond to an actual change of value in the commodities, or whether 
it be the result of mere fluctuations in market-prices, the effect 
on the quantity of the medium of circulation remains the same. ||Suppose the following articles to be sold or partially meta- 
morphosed simultaneously in different localities: say, one quarter 
of wheat, 20 yards of linen, one Bible, and 4 gallons of brandy. 
If the price of each article be £2, and the sum of the prices to be 
realised be consequently £8, it follows that £8 in money must 
go into circulation. If, on the other hand, these same articles are 
links in the following chain of metamorphoses: 1 quarter of wheat — 
£2—20 yards of linen— £2—1 Bible— £2— 4 gallons of brandy— 
£2, a chain that is already well known to us, in that case the £2 
cause the different commodities to circulate one after the other, 
and after realising their prices successively, and therefore the 
sum of those prices, £8, they come to rest at last in the pocket 
of the distiller. The £2 thus make four moves. This repeated change 
of place of the same pieces of money corresponds to the double 
change in form of the commodities, to their motion in opposite 
directions through two stages of circulation, and to the inter- 
lacing of the metamorphoses of different commodities. l These anti- 
thetic and complementary phases, of which the process of meta- ||morphosis consists, are gone through, not simultaneously, but suc- 
cessively. Time is therefore required for the completion of the se- 
ries. Hence the velocity of the currency of money is measured by 
the number of moves made by a given piece of money in a given 
time. Suppose the circulation of the 4 articles takes a day. The 
sum of the prices to be realised in the day is £8, the number of 
moves of the two pieces of money is four, and the quantity of 
money circulating is £2. Hence, for a given interval of time dur- 
ing the process of circulation, we have the following relation: 
the quantity of money functioning as the circulating medium is 
equal to the sum of the prices of the commodities divided by the 
number of moves made by coins of the same denomination. This 
law holds generally. ||The total circulation of commodities in a given country 
during a given period is made up on the one hand of numerous 
isolated and simultaneous partial metamorphoses, sales which 
are at the same time purchases, in which each coin changes its 
place only once, or makes only one move; on the other hand, 
of numerous distinct series of metamorphoses partly running 
side by side, and partly coalescing with each other, in each of 
which series each coin makes a number of moves, the number 
being greater or less according to circumstances. The total num- 
ber of moves made by all the circulating coins of one denomina- 
tion being given, we can arrive at the average number of moves 
made by a single coin of that denomination, or at the average 
velocity of the currency of money. The quantity of money thrown 
into the circulation at the beginning of each day is of course de- 
termined by the sum of the prices of all the commodities circulat- 
ing simultaneously side by side. But once in circulation, coins 
are, so to say, made responsible for one another. If the one in- 
crease its velocity, the other either retards its own, or altogether 
falls out of circulation; for the circulation can absorb only such 
a quantity of gold as when multiplied by the mean number of 
moves made by one single coin or element, is equal to the sum of the 
prices to be realised. Hence if the number of moves made by the 
separate pieces increase, the total number of those pieces in cir- 
culation diminishes. If the number of the moves diminish, the total 
number of pieces increases. Since the quantity of money capa- 
ble of being absorbed by the circulation is given for a given mean 
velocity of currency, all that is necessary in order to abstract a 
given number of sovereigns from the circulation is to throw the 
same number of one-pound notes into it, a trick well known to 
all bankers. ||Just as the currency of money, generally considered, is but 
a reflex of the circulation of commodities, or of the antithetical 
metamorphoses they undergo, so, too, the velocity of that cur- 
rency reflects the rapidity with which commodities change their 
forms, the continued interlacing of one series of metamorphoses 
with another, the hurried social interchange of matter, the rapid 
disappearance of commodities from the sphere of circulation, and 
the equally rapid substitution of fresh ones in their places. Hence, 
in the velocity of the currency we have the fluent unity of the anti- 
thetical and complementary phases, the unity of the conversion 
of the useful aspect of commodities into their value-aspect, and 
their re-conversion from the latter aspect to the former, or the unity 
of the two processes of sale and purchase. On the other hand, the 
retardation of the currency reflects the separation of these two 
processes into isolated antithetical phases, reflects the stagnation 
in the change of form, and therefore, in the social interchange of 
matter. The circulation itself, of course, gives no clue to the ori- 
gin of this stagnation; it merely puts in evidence the phenomenon 
itself. The general public, who, simultaneously with the retar- 
dation of the currency, see money appear and disappear less fre- 
quently at the periphery of circulation, naturally attribute this 
retardation to a quantitative deficiency in the circulating medium. l ||1 "Money being ... the common measure of buying and selling, every 
body who hath anything to sell, and cannot procure chapmen for it, is pres- 
ently apt to think, that want of money in the kingdom, or country, is the 
cause why his goods do not go off; and so, want of money is the common 
cry; which is a great mistake... What do these people want, who cry out for 
money? ... The farmer complains ... he thinks that were more money in the 
country, he should have a price for his goods. Then it seems money is not 
his want, but a price for his corn and cattel, which he would sell, but cannot... 
Why cannot he get a price? ... (1) Either there is too much corn and cattel 
in the country, so that most who come to market have need of selling, as he 
hath, and few of buying; or (2) There wants the usual vent abroad by trans- 
portation...; or (3) The consumption fails, as when men, by reason of poverty, 
do not spend so much in their houses as formerly they did; wherefore it is not 
the increase of specific money, which would at all advance the farmer's 
goods, but the removal of any of these three causes, which do truly keep down 
the market ... The merchant and shopkeeper want money in the same man- 
ner, that is, they want a vent for the goods they deal in, by reason that the 
markets fail".. [A nation] "never thrives better, than when riches are tost from 
hand to hand." (Sir Dudley North: "Discourses upon Trade," Lond. 1691, 
pp. 11-15, passim.) Herrenschwand's fanciful notions amount merely to 
this, that the antagonism, which has its origin in the nature of commodi- 
ties, and is reproduced in their circulation, can be removed by increasing ||hand, by the sum of the prices of the circulating commodities, 
and on the other hand, by the rapidity with which the anti- 
thetical phases of the metamorphoses follow one another. On this 
rapidity depends what proportion of the sum of the prices can, 
on the average, be realised by each single coin. But the sum of 
the prices of the circulating commodities depends on the quantity, 
as well as on the prices, of the commodities. These three factors, 
however, state of prices, quantity of circulating commodities, 
and velocity of money-currency, are all variable. Hence, the sum 
of the prices to be realised, and consequently the quantity of the 
circulating medium depending on that sum, will vary with the 
numerous variations of these three factors in combination. Of 
these variations we shall consider those alone that have been the 
most important in the history of prices. ||While prices remain constant, the quantity of the circulat- 
ing medium may increase owing to the number of circulating 
commodities increasing, or to the velocity of currency decreas- 
ing, or to a combination of the two. On the other hand the quan- 
tity of the circulating medium may decrease with a decreasing 
number of commodities, or with an increasing rapidity of their 
circulation. ||With a general rise in the prices of commodities, the quantity 
of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided the 
number of commodities in circulation decrease proportionally 
to the increase in their prices, or provided the velocity of currency 
increase at the same rate as prices rise, the number of commodi- 
ties in circulation remaining constant. The quantity of the cir- 
culating medium may decrease, owing to the number of commodi- 
ties decreasing more rapidly; or to the velocity of currency increas- 
ing more rapidly, than prices rise. ||With a general fall in the prices of commodities, the quan- 
tity of the circulating medium will remain constant, provided 
the number of commodities increase proportionally to their fall 
in price, or provided the velocity of currency decrease in the same 
proportion. The quantity of the circulating medium will increase, 
provided the number of commodities increase quicker, or the 
rapidity of circulation decrease quicker, than the prices fall. ||sate each other, so that notwithstanding their continued insta- 
bility, the sum of the prices to be realised and the quantity of 
money in circulation remain constant; consequently, we find, 
especially if we take long periods into consideration, that the 
deviations from the average level, of the quantity of money current 
in any country, are much smaller than we should at first sight 
expect, apart of course from excessive perturbations periodically 
arising from industrial and commercial crises, or, less frequently, 
from fluctuations in the value of money. ||The law, that the quantity of the circulating medium is 
determined by the sum of the prices of the commodities circu- 
lating, and the average velocity of currency 1 may also be stated 
as follows: given the sum of the values of commodities, and the 
average rapidity of their metamorphoses, the quantity of pre- 
cious metal current as money depends on the value of that precious 
metal. The erroneous opinion that it is, on the contrary, prices 
that are determined by the quantity of the circulating medium, 
and that the latter depends on the quantity of the precious ||1 "There is a certain measure and proportion of money requisite to 
drive the trade of a nation, more or less than which would prejudice the same. 
Just as there is a certain proportion of farthings necessary in a small retail 
trade, to change silver money, and to even such reckonings as cannot be ad- 
justed with the smallest silver pieces.... Now, as the proportion of the num- 
ber of farthings requisite in commerce is to be taken from the number of 
people, the frequency of their exchanges: as also, and principally, from the 
value of the smallest silver pieces of money; so in like manner, the propor- 
tion of money [gold and silver specie] requisite in our trade, is to be like- 
wise taken from the frequency of commutations, and from the bigness of 
the payments." (William Petty, "A Treatise of Taxes and Contributions." 
Lond. 1667, p. 17.) The Theory of Hume was defended against the attacks 
of J. Steuart and others, by A. Young, in his "Political Arithmetic," Lond. 
1774, in which work there is a special chapter entitled "Prices depend on 
quantity of money," at p. 112, squ. 1 have stated in "Zur Kritik, &c," p. 
149: "He (Adam Smith) passes over without remark the question as to the 
quantity of coin in circulation, and treats money quite wrongly as a mere 
commodity." This statement applies only in so far as Adam Smith, ex offi- 
cio, treats of money. Now and then, however, as in his criticism of the ear- 
lier systems of Political Economy, he takes the right view. "The quantity of 
coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which 
are to be circulated by it.... The value of the goods annually bought and sold 
in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and dis- 
tribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employment to no more. 
The channel of circulation necessarily draws to itself a sum sufficient to 
fill it, and never admits any more." ("Wealth of Nations." Bk. IV., ch. I.) 
In like manner, ex officio, he opens his work with an apotheosis on the divi- 
sion of labour. Afterwards, in the last book which treats of the sources of 
public revenue, he occasionally repeats the denunciations of the division of 
labour made by his teacher, A. Ferguson. ||metals in a country; 1 this opinion was based by those who first 
held it, on the absurd hypothesis that commodities are without a 
price, and money without a value, when they first enter into circu- 
lation, and that, once in the circulation, an aliquot part of the 
medley of commodities is exchanged for an aliquot part of the 
heap of precious metals. 2 ||1 "The prices of things will certainly rise in every nation, as the gold 
and silver increase amongst the people; and consequently, where the gold 
and silver decrease in any nation, the prices of all things must fall propor- 
tionately to such decrease of money." (Jacob Vanderlint: "Money Answers 
all Things." Lond, 1734, p. 5.) A careful comparison of this book with 
Hume's "Essays," proves to my mind without doubt that Hume was acquainted 
with and made use of Vanderlint's work, which is certainly an important one. 
The opinion that prices are determined by the quantity of the circulating 
medium, was also held by Barbon and other much earlier writers. "No incon- 
venience," says Vanderlint, "can arise by an unrestrained trade, but very 
great advantage; since, if the cash of the nation be decreased by it, which 
prohibitions are designed to prevent, those nations that get the cash will 
certainly find everything advance in price, as the cash increases amongst 
them. And ... our manufactures, and everything else, will soon become so 
moderate as to turn the balance of trade in our favour, and thereby fetch the 
money back again." (1. c, pp. 43, 44.) ||2 That the price of each single kind of commodity forms a part of the 
sum of the prices of all the commodities in circulation, is a self-evident 
proposition. But how use-values, which are incommensurable with regard to 
each other, are to be exchanged, en masse, for the total sum of gold and silver 
in a country, is quite incomprehensible. If we start from the notion that all 
commodities together form one single commodity, of which each is but an 
aliquot part, we get the following beautiful result: The total commodity=x 
cwt. of gold; commodity A=an aliquot part of the total commodity =the 
same aliquot part of x cwt. of gold. This is stated in all seriousness by Mon- 
tesquieu: "Si Ton compare la masse de Tor et de l'argent qui est dans le 
monde avec la somme des marchandises qui y sont, il est certain que chaque 
denree ou marchandise, en particulier, pourra etre comparee a une certaine 
portion de la masse entiere. Supposons qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule denree, ou 
marchandise dans le monde, ou qu'il n'y ait qu'une seule qui s'achete, et qu' 
eile se divise comme l'argent: Cette partie de cette marchandise repondra a 
une partie de la masse de l'argent; la moitie du total de l'une a la moilie 
du total de l'autre, &c. ... l'etablissement du prix des choses depend ton jours 
fondamentalement de la raison du total des choses au total des signes." (Mon- 
tesquieu, I. c. t. Ill, pp. 12, 13.) As to the further development of this theory 
by Ricardo and his disciples, James Mill, Lord Overstone, and others, see ||The only difference, therefore, between coin and bullion, is 
one of shape, and gold can at any time pass from one form to 
the other. 1 But no sooner does coin leave the mint, than it im- 
mediately finds itself on the high-road to the melting pot. During 
their currency, coins wear away, some more, others less. Name 
and substance, nominal weight and real weight, begin their 
process of separation. Coins of the same denomination become 
different in value, because they are different in weight. The 
weight of gold fixed upon as the standard of prices, deviates 
from the weight that serves as the circulating medium, and the ||"Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 140-146, and p. 150, sqq. John Stuart Mill, with 
his usual eclectic logic, understands how to hold at the same time the view 
of his father, James Mill, and the opposite view. On a comparison of the 
text of his compendium, "Principles of Pol. Econ.," with his preface to the 
first edition, in which preface he announces himself as the Adam Smith 
of his day— we do not know whether to admire more the simplicity of the 
man, or that of the public, who took him, in good faith, for the Adam Smith 
he announced himself to be, although he bears about as much resemblance 
to Adam Smith as say General Williams, of Kars, to the Duke of Wellington. 
The original researches of Mr. J. S. Mill, which are neither extensive nor 
profound, in the domain of Political Economy, will be found mustered in 
rank and file in his little work, "Some Unsettled Questions of Political 
Economy," which appeared in 1844. Locke asserts point blank the connex- 
ion between the absence of value in gold and silver, and the determination 
of their values by quantity alone. "Mankind having consented to put an 
imaginary value upon gold and silver ... the intrinsick value, regarded in 
these metals, is nothing but the quantity." ("Some Considerations," &c, 
1691, Works Ed. 1777, vol. II., p. 15.) ||1 It lies, of course, entirely beyond my purpose to take into considera- 
tion such details as the seigniorage on minting. I will, however, cite for the 
benefit of the romantic sycophant, Adam Miiller, who admires the "generous 
liberality" with which the English Government coins gratuitously, the fol- 
lowing opinion of Sir Dudley North: "Silver and gold, like other commodi- 
ties, have their ebbings and flowings. Upon the arrival of quantities from 
Spain ... it is carried into the Tower, and coined. Not long after there will 
come a demand for bullion to be exported again. If there is none, but all 
happens to be in coin, what then? Melt it down again; there's no loss in it, 
for the coining costs the owner nothing. Thus the nation has been abused, 
and made to pay for the twisting of straw for asses to eat. If the merchant 
were made to pay the price of the coinage, he would not have sent his silver 
to the Tower without consideration; and coined money would always keep 
a value above uncoined silver." (North, 1. c, p. 18.) North was himself one 
of the foremost merchants in the reign of Charles II. ||latter thereby ceases any longer to be a real equivalent of the com- 
modities whose prices it realises. The history of coinage during 
the middle ages and down into the 18th century, records the ever 
renewed confusion arising from this cause. The natural tendency 
of circulation to convert coins into a mere semblance of what they 
profess to be, into a symbol of the weight of metal they are offi- 
cially supposed to contain, is recognised by modern legislation, 
which fixes the loss of weight sufficient to demonetise a gold coin, 
or to make it no longer legal tender. ||The fact that the currency of coins itself effects a separation 
between their nominal and their real weight, creating a distinc- 
tion between them as mere pieces of metal on the one hand, and 
as coins with a definite function on the other — this fact implies 
the latent possibility of replacing metallic coins by tokens of some 
other material, by symbols serving the same purposes as coins. 
The practical difficulties in the way of coining extremely minute 
quantities of gold or silver, and the circumstance that at first 
the less precious metal is used as a measure of value instead of 
the more precious, copper instead of silver, silver instead of gold, 
and that the less precious circulates as money until dethroned by 
the more precious— all these facts explain the parts historically 
played by silver and copper tokens as substitutes for gold coins. 
Silver and copper tokens take the place of gold in those regions 
of the circulation where coins pass from hand to hand most rapid- 
ly, and are subject to the maximum amount of wear and tear. 
This occurs where sales and purchases on a very small scale are 
continually happening. In order to prevent these satellites from 
establishing themselves permanently in the place of gold, positive 
enactments determine the extent to which they must be compul- 
sorily received as payment instead of gold. The particular tracks 
pursued by the different species of coin in currency, run naturally 
into each other. The tokens keep company with gold, to pa) frac- 
tional parts of the smallest gold coin; gold is, on the one hand, con- 
stantly pouring into retail circulation, and on the other hand is as 
constantly being thrown out again by being changed into tokens. * 
The weight of metal in the silver and copper tokens is arbi- 
trarily fixed by law. When in currency, they wear away even 
more rapidly than gold coins. Hence their functions are totally 
independent of their weight, and consequently of all value. The 
function of gold as coin becomes completely independent of the 
metallic value of that gold. Therefore things tljat are relatively ||We allude here only to inconvertible paper money issued by 
the State and having compulsory circulation. It has its immediate 
origin in the metallic currency. Money based upon credit implies 
on the other hand conditions, which, from our standpoint of the 
simple circulation of commodities, are as yet totally unknown 
to us. But we may affirm this much, that just as true paper money 
takes its rise in the function of money as the circulating medium, 
so money based upon credit takes root spontaneously in the func- 
tion of money as the means of payment. 1 ||The State puts in circulation bits of paper on which their 
various denominations, say £1, £5, &c, are printed. In so far 
as they actually take the place of gold to the same amount, their 
movement is subject to the laws that regulate the currency of 
money itself. A law peculiar to the circulation of paper money 
can spring up only from the proportion in which that paper 
money represents gold. Such a law exists; stated simply, it is as 
follows: the issue of paper money must not exceed in amount 
the gold (or silver as the case may be) which would actually ||use of gold in the main payments necessarily implies also its use in the re- 
tail trade: those who have gold coin offering them for small purchases, and 
receiving with the commodity purchased a balance of silver in return; by 
which means the surplus of silver that would otherwise encumber the retail 
dealer, is drawn off and dispersed into general circulation. But if there is 
as much silver as will transact the small payments independent of gold, the 
retail trader must then receive silver for small purchases; and it must of neces- 
sity accumulate in his hands." (David Buchanan "Inquiry into the Taxation 
and Commercial Policy of Great Britain." Edinburgh, 1844, pp. 248, 249.) 
1 The mandarin Wan-mao-in, the Chinese Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
took it into his head one day to lay before the Son of Heaven a proposal 
that secretly aimed at converting the asstgnats of the empire into convert- 
ible bank-notes. The assignats Committee, in its report of April, 1854, 
gives him a severe snubbing Whether he also received the traditional drub- 
bing with bamboos is not stated. The concluding part of the report is as 
follows: — "The Committee has carefully examined his proposal and finds 
that it is entirely in favour of the merchants, and that no advantage will 
result to the crown." ("Arbeiten der Kaiserlich Russischen Gesandtschaft zu 
Peking iiber China." Aus dem Russischen von Dr. K Abel und F. A Mecklen- 
burg. Erster Band Berlin, 1858, p. 47 sq.) In his evidence before the Com- 
mittee of the House of Lords on the Bank Acts, a governor of the Bank of 
England says, with regard to the abrasion of gold coins during currency: 
"Every year a fresh class of sovereigns becomes too light. The class which 
one year passes with full weight, loses enough by wear and tear to draw the 
scales next year against it." (House of Lords' Committee, 1848, n. 429.) ||circulate if not replaced by symbols. Now the quantity of gold 
which the circulation can absorb, constantly fluctuates about a 
given level. Still, the mass of the circulating medium in a given 
country never sinks below a certain minimum easily ascertained by 
actual experience. The fact that this minimum mass continually un- 
dergoes changes in its constituent parts, or that the pieces of gold 
of which it consists are being constantly replaced by fresh ones, 
causes of course no change either in its amount or in the continuity 
of its circulation. It can therefore be replaced by paper symbols. 
If, on the other hand, all the conduits of circulation were to-day 
filled with paper money to the full extent of their capacity for 
absorbing money, they might to-morrow be overflowing in con- 
sequence of a fluctuation in the circulation of commodities. 
There would no longer be any standard. If the paper money 
exceed its proper limit, which is the amount in gold coins of the 
like denomination that can actually be current, it would, apart 
from the danger of falling into general disrepute, represent only 
that quantity of gold, which, in accordance with the laws of the 
circulation of commodities, is required, and is alone capable of 
being represented by paper. If the quantity of paper money issued 
be double what it ought to be, then, as a matter of fact, £1 would ||Paper money is a token representing gold or money. The 
relation between it and the values of commodities is this, that 
the latter are ideally expressed in the same quantities of gold 
that are symbolically represented by the paper. Only in so far as 
paper money represents gold, which like all other commodities 
has value, is it a symbol of value. x ||Finally, some one may ask why gold is capable of being 
replaced by tokens that have no value? But, as we have already 
seen, it is capable of being so replaced only in so far as it functions 
exclusively as coin, or as the circulating medium, and as nothing 
else. Now, money has other functions besides this one, and the 
isolated function of serving as the mere circulating medium is 
not necessarily the only one attached to gold coin, although this ||is the case with those abraded coins that continue to circulate. 
Each piece of money is a mere coin, or means of circulation, only 
so long as it actually circulates. But this is just the case with that 
minimum mass of gold, which is capable of being replaced by 
paper money. That mass remains constantly within the sphere 
of circulation, continually functions as a circulating medium, and 
exists exclusively for that purpose. Its movement therefore 
represents nothing but the continued alternation of the inverse 
phases of the metamorphosis G— M— C, phases in which commodi- 
ties confront their value-forms, only to disappear again immedi- 
ately. The independent existence of the exchange-value of a com- 
modity is here a transient apparition, by means of which the com- 
modity is immediately replaced by another commodity. Hence, 
in this process which continually makes money pass from hand 
to hand, the mere symbolical existence of money suffices. Its 
functional existence absorbs, so to say, its material existence. 
Being a transient and objective reflex of the prices of commodi- 
ties, it serves only as a symbol of itself, and is therefore capable 
of being replaced by a token. l One thing is, however, requisite; 
this token must have an objective social validity of its own, 
and this the paper symbol acquires by its forced currency. This 
compulsory action of the State can take effect only within that 
inner sphere of circulation which is co-terminous with the terri- 
tories of the community, but it is also only within that sphere 
that money completely responds to its function of being the cir^ 
culating medium, or becomes coin. ||monetary functions which are usually performed by gold and silver coins, 
may be performed as effectually by a circulation of inconvertible notes, 
having no value but that factitious and conventional value they derive 
from the law, is a fact which admits, I conceive, of no denial. Value of this 
description may be made to answer all the purposes of intrinsic value, and 
supersede even the necessity for a standard, provided only the quantity of 
issues be kept under due limitation." (Fullarton: "Regulation of Currencies," 
London, 1845, p. 21.) Because the commodity that serves as money is ca- 
pable of being replaced in circulation by mere symbols of value, therefore 
its functions as a measure of value and a standard of prices are declared to 
be superfluous! ||1 From the fact that gold and silver, so far as they are coins, or exclu- 
sively serve as the medium of circulation, become mere tokens of themselves, 
Nicholas Barbon deduces the right of Governments 'to raise money," that 
is, to give to the weight of silver that is called a shilling the name of a 
greater weight, such as a crown; and so to pay creditors shillings, instead of 
crowns "Money does wear and grow lighter by often telling over... It is the 
denomination and currency of the money that men regard in bargaining, and 
not the quantity of silver... Tis the public authority upon the metal that 
makes it money." (N. Barbon, 1. c. f pp 29, 30, 25.) ||The commodity that functions as a measure of value, and, 
either in its own person or by a representative, as the medium 
of circulation, is money. Gold (or silver) is therefore money. It 
functions as money, on the one hand, when it has to be present 
in its own golden person. It is then, the money-commodity, nei- 
ther merely ideal, as in its function of a measure of value, nor 
capable of being represented, as in its function of circulating 
medium. On the other hand, it also functions as money, when by 
virtue of its function, whether that function be performed in per- 
son or by representative, it congeals into the sole form of value, 
the only adequate form of existence of exchange-value, in opposi- 
tion to use-value, represented by all other commodities. ||The continual movement in circuits of the two antithetical 
metamorphoses of commodities, or the never ceasing alternation 
of sale and purchase, is reflected in the restless currency of money, 
or in the function that money performs of a perpetuum mobile 
of circulation. But so soon as the series of metamorphoses is in- 
terrupted, so soon as sales are not supplemented by subsequent 
purchases, money ceases to be mobilised; it is transformed, as 
Boisgiuillebensays, from "meuble" into "immeuble," from mov- 
able into immovable, from coin into money. ||With the very earliest development of the circulation of 
commodities, there is also developed the necessity, and the pas- 
sionate desire, to hold fast the product of the first metamorphosis. 
This product is the transformed shape of the commodity, or its 
gold-chrysalis. l Commodities are thus sold not for the purpose 
of buying others, but in order to replace their commodity-form 
by their money-form. From being the mere means of effecting 
the circulation of commodities, this change of form becomes the 
end and aim. The changed form of the commodity is thus pre- 
vented from functioning as its unconditionally alienable form, or 
as its merely transient money-form. The money becomes petri- 
fied into a hoard, and the seller becomes a hoarder of money. ||Gold and silver thus become of themselves social expressions 
for superfluity or wealth. This naive form of hoarding becomes 
perpetuated in those communities in which the traditional mode 
of production is carried on for the supply of a fixed and limited 
circle of home wants. It is thus with the people of Asia, and partic- 
ularly of the East Indies. Vanderlint, who fancies that the prices 
of commodities in a country are determined by the quantity 
of gold and silver to be found in it, asks himself why Indian com- 
modities are so cheap. Answer: Because the Hindus bury their 
money. From 1602 to 1734, he remarks, they buried 150 millions 
of pounds sterling of silver, which originally came from America 
to Europe. x In the 10 years from 1856 to 1866, England exported 
to India and China £120,000,000 in silver, which had been re- 
ceived in exchange for Australian gold. Most of the silver exported 
to China makes its way to India. ||As the production of commodities further develops, every 
producer of commodities is compelled to make sure of the nexus 
rerum or the social pledge. 2 His wants are constantly making 
themselves felt, and necessitate the continual purchase of other 
people's commodities, while the production and sale of his own 
goods require time, and depend upon circumstances. In order then to 
be able to buy without selling, he must have sold previously without 
buying. This operation, conducted on a general scale, appears to 
imply a contradiction. But the precious metals at the sources 
of their production are directly exchanged for other commodities. 
And here we have sales (by the owners of commodities) without 
purchases (by the owners of gold or silver). 3 And subsequent 
sales, by other producers, unfollowed by purchases, merely bring 
about the distribution of the newly produced precious metals 
among all the owners of commodities. In this way, all along 
the line of exchange, hoards of gold and silver of varied extent 
are accumulated. With the possibility of holding and storing 
up exchange-value in the shape of a particular commodity, 
arises also the greed for gold. Along with the extension of 
circulation, increases the power of money, that absolutely social 
form of wealth ever ready for use. "Gold is a wonderful thing! 
Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. By means oi ||gold one can even get souls into Paradise." (Columbus in his 
letter from Jamaica, 1503.) Since gold does not disclose what 
has been transformed into it, everything, commodity or not, 
is convertible into gold. Everything becomes saleable and buyable. 
The circulation becomes the great social retort into which every- 
thing is thrown, to come out again as a gold-crystal. Not even are 
the bones of saints, and still less are more delicate res sacrosan- 
cta?, extra commercium hominum able to withstand this alchemy. 1 
Just as every qualitative difference between commodities is ex- 
tinguished in money, so money, on its side, like the radical leveller 
that it is, does away with all distinctions. 2 But money itself is a 
commodity, an external object, capable of becoming the private 
property of any individual. Thus social power becomes the private 
power of private persons. The ancients therefore denounced money 
as subversive of the economic and moral order of things. 3 Modern 
society, which, soon after its birth, pulled Plutus by the hair of ||1 Henry III., most Christian king of France, robbed cloisters of their 
relics, and turned them into money. It is well known what part the despoil- 
ing of the Delphic Temple, by the Phocians, played in the history of Greece. 
Temples with the ancients served as the dwellings of the gods of commodi- 
ties. They were "sacred banks." With the Phoenicians, a trading people par 
excellence, money was the transmuted shape of everything. It was, there- 
fore, quite in order that the virgins, who, at the feast of the Goddess of Love, 
gave themselves up to strangers, should offer to the goddess the piece of 
money they received. ||A commodity, in its capacity of a use-value, satisfies a par- 
ticular want, and is a particular element of material wealth. 
But the value of a commodity measures the degree of its attraction 
for all other elements of material wealth, and therefore measures 
the social wealth of its owner. To a barbarian owner of commodi- 
ties, and even to a West-European peasant, value is the same as 
value-form, and therefore, to him the increase in his hoard of 
gold and silver is an increase in value. It is true that the value 
of money varies, at one time in consequence of a variation in its 
own value, at another, in consequence of a change in the values 
of commodities. But this, on the one hand, does not prevent 
200 ounces of gold from still containing more value than 100 
ounces, nor, on the other hand, does it hinder the actual metallic 
form of this article from continuing to be the universal equiva- 
lent form of all other commodities, and the immediate social 
incarnation of all human labour. The u:sire after hoarding is 
in its very nature unsatiable. In its qualitative aspect, or formally 
considered, money has no bounds to its efficacy, i.e., it is the 
universal representative of material wealth, because it is directly 
convertible into any other commodity. But, at the same time, 
every actual sum of money is limited in amount, and, therefore, 
as a means of purchasing, has only a limited efficacy. This antago- 
nism between the quantitative limits of money and its qualita- 
tive boundlessness, continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his 
Sisyphus-like labour of accumulating. It is with him as it is 
with a conqueror who sees in every new country annexed, only 
a new boundary. ||In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form 
a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from trans- 
forming itself into a means of enjoyment. The hoarder, therefore, 
makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. He 
acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. On the other hand, 
he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has 
thrown into it in the shape of commodities. The more he produces, 
the more he is able to sell. Hard work, saving, and avarice, are, 
therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy 
little the sum of his political economy. 2 ||By the side of the gross form of a hoard, we find also its 
aesthetic form in the possession of gold and silver articles. This 
grows with the wealth of civil society. "Soyons riches ou parais- 
sons riches" (Diderot). In this way there is created, on the one 
hand, a constantly extending market for gold and silver, uncon- 
nected with their functions as money, and, on the other hand, a 
latent source of supply, to which recourse is had principally in 
times of crisis and social disturbance. ||Hoarding serves various purposes in the economy of the met- 
allic circulation. Its first function arises out of the conditions 
to which the currency of gold and silver coins is subject. We 
have seen how, along with the continual fluctuations in the ex- 
tent and rapidity of the circulation of commodities and in their 
prices, the quantity of money current unceasingly ebbs and flows. 
This mass must, therefore, be capable of expansion and contrac- 
tion. At one time money must be attracted in order to act as 
circulating coin, at another, circulating coin must be repelled 
in order to act again as more or less stagnant money. In order 
that the mass of money, actually current, may constantly saturate 
the absorbing power of the circulation, it is necessary that the 
quantity of gold and silver in a country be greater than the quan- 
tity required to function as coin. This condition is fulfilled by 
money taking the form of hoards. These reserves serve as con- 
duits for the supply or withdrawal of money to or from the circu- 
lation, which in this way never overflows its banks. x ||In the simple form of the circulation of commodities hitherto 
considered, we found a given value always presented to us in a 
double shape, as a commodity at one pole, as money at the oppo- 
site pole. The owners of commodities came therefore into contact 
as the respective representatives of what were already equivalents. 
But with the development of circulation, conditions arise under 
which the alienation of commodities becomes separated, by an ||1 "There is required for carrying on the trade of the nation a determi- 
nate sum of specifick money, which varies, and is sometimes more, some- 
times less, as the circumstances we are in require.... This ebbing and flowing 
of money supplies and accommodates itself, without any aid of Politicians.... 
The buckets work alternately; when money is scarce, bullion is coined; when 
bullion is scarce, money is melted." (Sir D. North, 1. c, Postscript, p. 3.) 
John Stuart Mill, who for a long time was an official of the East India Com- ||interval of time, from the realisation of their prices. It will 
be sufficient to indicate the most simple of these conditions. 
One sort of article requires a longer, another a shorter time for 
its production. Again, the production of different commodities 
depends on different seasons of the year. One sort of commodity 
may be born on its own market place, another has to make a long 
journey to market. Commodity-owner No. 1, may therefore be 
ready to sell, before No. 2 is ready to buy. When the same trans- 
actions are continually repeated between the same persons, the 
conditions of sale are regulated in accordance with the conditions 
of production. On the other hand, the use of a given commodity, 
of a house, for instance, is sold (in common parlance, let) for a 
definite period. Here, it is only at the end of the term that the 
buyer has actually received the use-value of the commodity. He 
therefore buys it before he pays for it. The vendor sells an exist- 
ing commodity, the purchaser buys as the mere representative 
of money, or rather of future money. The vendor becomes a cred- 
itor, the purchaser becomes a debtor. Since the metamorphosis 
of commodities, or the development of their value-form, appears 
here under a new aspect, money also acquires a fresh function; 
it becomes the means of payment. ||The character of creditor, or of debtor, results here from the 
simple circulation. The change in the form of that circulation 
stamps buyer and seller with this new die. At first, therefore, 
these new parts are just as transient and alternating as those of 
seller and buyer, and are in turns played by the same actors. 
But the opposition is not nearly so pleasant, and is far more 
capable of crystallisation. x The same characters can, however, 
be assumed independently of the circulation of commodities. 
The class-struggles of the ancient world took the form chiefly 
of a contest between debtors and creditors, which in Rome ended 
in the ruin of the plebeian debtors. They were displaced by slaves. 
In the middle ages the contest ended with the ruin of the feudal ||pany, confirms the fact that in India silver ornaments still continue to per- 
form directly the functions of a hoard. The silver ornaments are brought 
out and coined when there is a high rate of interest, and go back again when 
the rate of interest falls. (J. S. Mill's Evidence. "Reports on Bank Acts," 
1857, 2084.) According to a Parliamentary document of 1864, on the gold 
and silver import and export of India, the import of gold and silver in 1863 
exceeded the export by £ 19,367,764. During the 8 years immediately pre- 
ceding 1864, the excess of imports over exports of the precious metals amount- 
ed to £109,652,917. During this century far more than £200,000,000 has 
been coined in India. ||Let us return to the circulation of commodities. The appear- 
ance of the two equivalents, commodities and money, at the t'svo 
poles of the process of sale, has ceased to be simultaneous. The 
money functions now, first as a measure of value in the determi- 
nation of the price of the commodity sold; the price fixed by 
the contract measures the obligation of the debtor, or the sum of 
money that he has to pay at a fixed date. Secondly, it serves as 
an ideal means of purchase. Although existing only in the promise 
of the buyer to pay, it causes the commodity to change hands. 
It is not before the day fixed for payment that the means of pay- 
ment actually steps into circulation, leaves the hand of the buyer 
for that of the seller. The circulating medium was transformed 
into a hoard, because the process stopped short after the first 
phase, because the converted shape of the commodity, viz., the 
money, was withdrawn from circulation. The means of payment 
enters the circulation, but only after the commodity has left 
it. The money is no longer the means that brings about the process. 
It only brings it to a close, by stepping in as the absolute form of 
existence of exchange-value, or as the universal commodity. The 
seller turned his commodity into money, in order thereby to satisfy 
some want; the hoarder did the same in order to keep his commodity 
in its money-shape, and the debtor in order to be able to pay; 
if he do not pay, his goods will be sold by the sheriff. The value- 
form of commodities, money, is therefore now the end and aim 
of a sale, and that owing to a social necessity springing out of 
the process of circulation itself. ||The buyer converts money back into commodities before he 
has turned commodities into money: in other words, he achieves 
the second metamorphosis of commodities before the first. The 
seller's commodity circulates, and realises its price, but only in 
the shape of a legal claim upon money. It is converted into a 
use-value before it has been converted into money. The completion 
of its first metamorphosis follows only at a later period. 1 ||The obligations falling due within a given period, represent 
the sum of the prices of the commodities, the sale of which gave 
rise to those obligations. The quantity of gold necessary to realise 
this sum, depends, in the first instance, on the rapidity of currency 
of the means of payment. That quantity is conditioned by two 
circumstances: first the relations between debtors and creditors 
form a sort of chain, in such a way that A, when he receives money 
from his debtor B, straightway hands it over to G his creditor, 
and so on; the second circumstance is the length of the intervals 
between the different due-days of the obligations. The continuous 
chain of payments, or retarded first metamorphoses, is essentially 
different from that interlacing of the series of metamorphoses 
which we considered on a former page. By the currency of the 
circulating medium, the connexion between buyers and sellers, 
is not merely expressed. This connexion is originated by, and 
exists in, the circulation alone. Contrariwise, the movement of 
the means of payment expresses a social relation that was in 
existence long before. ||The fact that a number of sales take place simultaneously, 
and side by side, limits the extent to which coin can be replaced 
by the rapidity of currency. On the other hand, this fact is a new 
lever in economising the means of payment. In proportion as 
payments are concentrated at one spot, special institutions and 
methods are developed for their liquidation. Such in the middle 
ages were the virements at Lyons. The debts due to A from B, 
to B from C, to G from A, and so on, have only to be confronted 
with each other, in order to annul each other to a certain extent 
like positive and negative quantities. There thus remains only 
a single balance to pay. The greater the amount of the payments 
concentrated, the less is this balance relatively to that amount, 
and the less is the mass of the means of payment in circula- 
tion. ||"Contrariwise, in the process M — G, the money can be alienated as a real 
means of purchase, and in that way, the price of the commodity can be 
realised before the use-value of the money is realised and the commodity 
actually delivered. This occurs constantly under the every-day form of pre- 
payments. And it is under this form, that the English government purchases 
opium from the ryots of India.... In these cases, however, the money always 
acts as a means of purchase.... Of course capital also is advanced in the 
shape of money.... This point of view, however, does not fall within the 
horizon of simple circulation." ("Zur Kritik, &c," pp. 119, 120.) ||payments balance one another, money functions only ideally as 
money of account, as a measure of value. In so far as actual pay- 
ments have to be made, money does not serve as a circulating 
medium, as a mere transient agent in the interchange of products, 
but as the individual incarnation of social labour, as the inde- 
pendent form of existence of exchange-value, as the universal com- 
modity. This contradiction comes to a head in those phases of indus- 
trial and commercial crises which are known as monetary crises. 1 
Such a crisis occurs only where the ever-lengthening chain of 
payments, and an artificial system of settling them, has been 
fully developed. Whenever there is a general and extensive dis- 
turbance of this mechanism, no matter what its cause, money 
becomes suddenly and immediately transformed, from its merely 
ideal shape of money of account, into hard cash. Profane commodi- 
ties can no longer replace it. The use-value of commodities be- 
comes valueless, and their value vanishes in the presence of its own 
independent form. On the eve of the crisis, the bourgeois, with 
the self-sufficiency that springs from intoxicating prosperity, 
declares money to be a vain imagination. Commodities alone are 
money. But now the cry is everywhere: money alone is a commod- 
ity! As the hart pants after fresh water, so pants his soul after 
money, the only wealth. 2 In a crisis, the antithesis between com- 
modities and their value-form, money, becomes heightened into 
an absolute contradiction. Hence, in such events, the form under 
which money appears is of no importance. The money famine 
continues, whether payments have to be made in gold or in 
credit money such as bank-notes. 3 ||1 The monetary crisis referred to in the text, being a phase of every 
crisis, must be clearly distinguished from that particular form of crisis, which 
also is called a monetary crisis, but which may be produced by itself as an 
independent phenomenon in such a way as to react only indirectly on indus- 
try and commerce. The pivot of these crises is to be found in moneyed capi- 
tal, and their sphere of direct action is therefore the sphere of that capital, 
viz., banking, the stock exchange, and finance. ||2 "The sudden reversion from a system of credit to a system of hard 
cash heaps theoretical fright on top of the practical panic; and the dealers 
by whose agency circulation is affected, shudder before the impenetrable 
mystery in which their own economic relations are involved" (Karl Marx, 
1. c, p. 126). "The poor stand still, because the rich have no money to em- 
ploy them, though they have the same land and hands to provide victuals 
and clothes, as ever they had;... which is the true Riches of a Nation, and not 
the money." (John Bellers: "Proposals for Raising a Colledge of Industry." 
Lond. 1696, p. 3.) ||If we now consider the sum total of the money current dur- 
ing a given period, we shall find that, given the rapidity of cur- 
rency of the circulating medium and of the means of payment, 
it is equal to the sum of the prices to be realised, plus the sum of 
the payments falling due, minus the payments that balance each 
other, minus finally the number of circuits in which the same 
piece of coin serves in turn as means of circulation and of payment. 
Hence, even when prices, rapidity of currency, and the extent 
of the economy in payments, are given, the quantity of money 
current and the mass of commodities circulating during a given 
period, such as a day, no longer correspond. Money that represents 
commodities long withdrawn from circulation, continues to be 
current. Commodities circulate, whose equivalent in money 
will not appear on the scene till some future day. Moreover, the 
debts contracted each day, and the payments falling due on the 
same day, are quite incommensurable quantities. 1 ||Credit-money springs directly out of the function of money 
as a means of payment. Certificates of the debts owing for the 
purchased commodities circulate for the purpose of transferring 
those debts to others. On the other hand, to the same extent as 
the system of credit is extended, so is the function of money 
as a means of payment. In that character it takes various forms 
peculiar to itself under which it makes itself at home in the sphere ||in his private room raised the lid of the desk he sat over, and displayed to 
a friend rolls of bank-notes, saying with intense glee there were £ 600,000 
of them, they were held to make money tight, and would all be let out after 
three o'clock on the same day." ("The Theory of Exchanges. The Bank Charter 
Act of 1844." Lond. 1864, p. 81.) The Observer, a semi-official government 
organ, contained the following paragraph on 24th April, 1864: "Some very 
curious rumours are current of the means which have been resorted to in 
order to create a scarcity of bank-notes.... Questionable as it would seem, lo 
suppose that any trick of the kind would be adopted, the report has been so 
universal that it really deserves mention." ||1 "The amount of purchases or contracts entered upon during the course 
of any given day, will not affect the quantity of money afloat on that partic- 
ular day, but, in the vast majority of cases, will resolve themselves into 
multifarious drafts upon the quantity of money which may be afloat at sub- 
sequent dates more or less distant.... The bills granted or credits opened, 
to-day, need have no resemblance whatever, either in quantity, amount, or 
duration, to those granted or entered upon to-morrow .or next day; nay, 
many of to-day's bills, and credits, when due, fall in with a mass of liabil- 
ities whose origins traverse a range of antecedent dates altogether indefinite, 
bills at 12, 6, 3 months or 1 often aggregating together to swell the common 
liabilities of one particular day..." ("The Currency Theory Reviewed; in a 
Letter to the Scottish people." By a Banker in England. Edinburgh, 1845, 
pp. 29, 30 passim.) ||of great commercial transactions. Gold and silver coin, on the 
other hand, are mostly relegated to the sphere of retail trade. 1 
When the production of commodities has sufficiently ex- 
tended itself, money begins to serve as the means of payment 
beyond the sphere of the circulation of commodities. It becomes 
the commodity that is the universal subject-matter of all con- 
tracts. 2 Rents, taxes, and such like payments are transformed 
from payments in kind into money payments. To what extent 
this transformation depends upon the general conditions of pro- 
duction, is shown, to take one example, by the fact that the 
Roman Empire twice failed in its attempt to levy all contributions 
in money. The unspeakable misery of the French agricultural 
population under Louis XIV., a misery so eloquently denounced 
by Boisguillebert, Marshal Vauban, and others, was due not 
only to the weight of the taxes, but also to the conversion of taxes 
in kind into money taxes. 3 In Asia, on the other hand, the fact 
that state taxes are chiefly composed of rents payable in kind, ||depends on conditions of production that are reproduced with 
the regularity of natural phenomena. And this mode of payment 
tends in its turn to maintain the ancient form of production. It 
is one of the secrets of the conservation of the Ottoman Empire. 
If the foreign trade, forced upon Japan by Europeans, should 
lead to the substitution of money rents for rents in kind, it will 
be all up with the exemplary agriculture of that country. The 
narrow economic conditions under which that agriculture is 
carried on, will be swept away. ||In every country, certain days of the year become by habit 
recognised settling days for various large and recurrent payments. 
These dates depend, apart from other revolutions in the wheel 
of reproduction, on conditions closely connected with the seasons. 
They also regulate the dates for payments that have no direct 
connexion with the circulation of commodities such as taxes, 
rents, and so on. The quantity of money requisite to make the 
payments, falling due on those dates all over the country, causes 
periodical, though merely superficial, perturbations in the economy 
of the medium of payment. 1 ||1 "On Whitsuntide, 1824," says Mr. Craig before the Commons' Com- 
mittee of 1826, "there was such an immense demand for notes upon the banks 
of Edinburgh, that by 11 o'clock they had not a note left in their custody. 
They sent round to all the different banks to borrow, but could not get them, 
and many of the transactions were adjusted by slips of paper only; yet by 
three o'clock the whole of the notes were returned into the banks from which 
they had issued! It was a mere transfer from hand to hand." Although Hie 
average effective circulation of bank-notes in Scotland is less than three 
millions sterling, yet on certain pay days in the year, every single note in 
the possession of the bankers, amounting in the whole to about £7,000,000, 
is called into activity. On these occasions the notes have a single and speci t- 
ic function to perform, and so soon as they have performed it, they flow back 
into the various banks from which they issued. (See John Fullarton, "Regu- 
lation of Currencies." Lond. 1845, p. 86, note.) In explanation it should he 
stated, that in Scotland, at the dateof Fullarton'swork, notes and not cheques 
were used to withdraw deposits. ||The development of money into a medium of payment makes 
it necessary to accumulate money against the dates fixed for 
the payment of the sums owing. While hoarding, as a distinct 
mode of acquiring riches, vanishes with the progress of civil so- 
ciety, the formation of reserves of the means of payment grows 
with that progress. ||When money leaves the home sphere of circulation, it strips 
off the local garbs which it there assumes, of a standard of prices, 
of coin, of tokens, and of a symbol of value, and returns to its 
original form of bullion. In the trade between the markets of the 
world, the value of commodities is expressed so as to be univer- 
sally recognised. Hence their independent value-form also, in 
these cases, confronts them under the shape of universal money. 
It is only in the markets of the world that money acquires to the 
full extent the character of the commodity whose bodily form is 
also the immediate social incarnation of human labour in the 
abstract. Its real mode of existence in this sphere adequately 
corresponds to its ideal concept. ||1 Hence the absurdity of every law prescribing that the banks of a 
country shall form reserves of that precious metal alone which circulates 
at home. The "pleasant difficulties" thus self-created by the Bank 
of England, are well known